<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto III<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_169">[169]</a></h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Hail, Muse! <i>et cetera.</i>—We left Juan sleeping,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pillowed upon a fair and happy breast,</p>
					<p>And watched by eyes that never yet knew weeping,</p>
					<p class="i2">And loved by a young heart, too deeply blest</p>
					<p>To feel the poison through her spirit creeping,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or know who rested there, a foe to rest,</p>
					<p>Had soiled the current of her sinless years,</p>
					<p>And turned her pure heart's purest blood to tears!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, Love! what is it in this world of ours</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes it fatal to be loved? Ah why</p>
					<p>With cypress branches hast thou wreathed thy bowers,</p>
					<p class="i2">And made thy best interpreter a sigh?</p>
					<p>As those who dote on odours pluck the flowers,</p>
					<p class="i2">And place them on their breast—but place to die—</p>
					<p>Thus the frail beings we would fondly cherish</p>
					<p>Are laid within our bosoms but to perish.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In her first passion Woman loves her lover,</p>
					<p class="i2">In all the others all she loves is Love,</p>
					<p>Which grows a habit she can ne'er get over,</p>
					<p class="i2">And fits her loosely—like an easy glove,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CH">[CH]</a></p>
					<p>As you may find, whene'er you like to prove her:</p>
					<p class="i2">One man alone at first her heart can move;</p>
					<p>She then prefers him in the plural number,</p>
					<p>Not finding that the additions much encumber.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I know not if the fault be men's or theirs;</p>
					<p class="i2">But one thing's pretty sure; a woman planted</p>
					<p>(Unless at once she plunge for life in prayers)—</p>
					<p class="i2">After a decent time must be gallanted;</p>
					<p>Although, no doubt, her first of love affairs</p>
					<p class="i2">Is that to which her heart is wholly granted;</p>
					<p>Yet there are some, they say, who have had <i>none</i>,</p>
					<p>But those who have ne'er end with only <i>one</i>.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_170">[170]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is melancholy, and a fearful sign</p>
					<p class="i2">Of human frailty, folly, also crime,</p>
					<p>That Love and Marriage rarely can combine,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although they both are born in the same clime;</p>
					<p>Marriage from Love, like vinegar from wine—</p>
					<p class="i2">A sad, sour, sober beverage—by Time</p>
					<p>Is sharpened from its high celestial flavour</p>
					<p>Down to a very homely household savour.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There's something of antipathy, as 't were,</p>
					<p class="i2">Between their present and their future state;</p>
					<p>A kind of flattery that's hardly fair</p>
					<p class="i2">Is used until the truth arrives too late—</p>
					<p>Yet what can people do, except despair?</p>
					<p class="i2">The same things change their names at such a rate;</p>
					<p>For instance—Passion in a lover's glorious,</p>
					<p>But in a husband is pronounced uxorious.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Men grow ashamed of being so very fond;</p>
					<p class="i2">They sometimes also get a little tired</p>
					<p>(But that, of course, is rare), and then despond:</p>
					<p class="i2">The same things cannot always be admired,</p>
					<p>Yet 't is "so nominated in the bond,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_171">[171]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">That both are tied till one shall have expired.</p>
					<p>Sad thought! to lose the spouse that was adorning</p>
					<p>Our days, and put one's servants into mourning.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There's doubtless something in domestic doings</p>
					<p class="i2">Which forms, in fact, true Love's antithesis;</p>
					<p>Romances paint at full length people's wooings,</p>
					<p class="i2">But only give a bust of marriages;</p>
					<p>For no one cares for matrimonial cooings,</p>
					<p class="i2">There's nothing wrong in a connubial kiss:</p>
					<p>Think you, if Laura had been Petrarch's wife,</p>
					<p>He would have written sonnets all his life?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CI">[CI]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All tragedies are finished by a death,</p>
					<p class="i2">All comedies are ended by a marriage;</p>
					<p>The future states of both are left to faith,</p>
					<p class="i2">For authors fear description might disparage</p>
					<p>The worlds to come of both, or fall beneath,</p>
					<p class="i2">And then both worlds would punish their miscarriage;</p>
					<p>So leaving each their priest and prayer-book ready,</p>
					<p>They say no more of Death or of the Lady.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_172">[172]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The only two that in my recollection,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have sung of Heaven and Hell, or marriage, are</p>
					<p>Dante<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_173">[173]</a> and Milton,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_174">[174]</a> and of both the affection</p>
					<p class="i2">Was hapless in their nuptials, for some bar</p>
					<p>Of fault or temper ruined the connection</p>
					<p class="i2">(Such things, in fact, it don't ask much to mar);</p>
					<p>But Dante's Beatrice and Milton's Eve</p>
					<p>Were not drawn from their spouses, you conceive.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some persons say that Dante meant Theology</p>
					<p class="i2">By Beatrice, and not a mistress—I,</p>
					<p>Although my opinion may require apology,</p>
					<p class="i2">Deem this a commentator's phantasy,</p>
					<p>Unless indeed it was from his own knowledge he</p>
					<p class="i2">Decided thus, and showed good reason why;</p>
					<p>I think that Dante's more abstruse ecstatics</p>
					<p>Meant to personify the Mathematics.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_175">[175]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Haidée and Juan were not married, but</p>
					<p class="i2">The fault was theirs, not mine: it is not fair,</p>
					<p>Chaste reader, then, in any way to put</p>
					<p class="i2">The blame on me, unless you wish they were;</p>
					<p>Then if you'd have them wedded, please to shut</p>
					<p class="i2">The book which treats of this erroneous pair,</p>
					<p>Before the consequences grow too awful;</p>
					<p>'T is dangerous to read of loves unlawful.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet they were happy,—happy in the illicit</p>
					<p class="i2">Indulgence of their innocent desires;</p>
					<p>But more imprudent grown with every visit,</p>
					<p class="i2">Haidée forgot the island was her Sire's;</p>
					<p>When we have what we like 't is hard to miss it,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least in the beginning, ere one tires;</p>
					<p>Thus she came often, not a moment losing,</p>
					<p>Whilst her piratical papa was cruising.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Let not his mode of raising cash seem strange,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although he fleeced the flags of every nation,</p>
					<p>For into a Prime Minister but change</p>
					<p class="i2">His title, and 't is nothing but taxation;</p>
					<p>But he, more modest, took an humbler range</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Life, and in an honester vocation</p>
					<p>Pursued o'er the high seas his watery journey,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CJ">[CJ]</a></p>
					<p>And merely practised as a sea-attorney.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The good old gentleman had been detained</p>
					<p class="i2">By winds and waves, and some important captures;</p>
					<p>And, in the hope of more, at sea remained,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although a squall or two had damped his raptures,</p>
					<p>By swamping one of the prizes; he had chained</p>
					<p class="i2">His prisoners, dividing them like chapters</p>
					<p>In numbered lots; they all had cuffs and collars,</p>
					<p>And averaged each from ten to a hundred dollars.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some he disposed of off Cape Matapan,</p>
					<p class="i2">Among his friends the Mainots; some he sold</p>
					<p>To his Tunis correspondents, save one man</p>
					<p class="i2">Tossed overboard unsaleable (being old);</p>
					<p>The rest—save here and there some richer one,</p>
					<p class="i2">Reserved for future ransom—in the hold,</p>
					<p>Were linked alike, as, for the common people, he</p>
					<p>Had a large order from the Dey of Tripoli.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The merchandise was served in the same way,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pieced out for different marts in the Levant,</p>
					<p>Except some certain portions of the prey,</p>
					<p class="i2">Light classic articles of female want,</p>
					<p>French stuffs, lace, tweezers, toothpicks, teapot, tray,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CK">[CK]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Guitars and castanets from Alicant,</p>
					<p>All which selected from the spoil he gathers,</p>
					<p>Robbed for his daughter by the best of fathers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A monkey, a Dutch mastiff, a mackaw,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_176">[176]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Two parrots, with a Persian cat and kittens,</p>
					<p>He chose from several animals he saw—</p>
					<p class="i2">A terrier, too, which once had been a Briton's,</p>
					<p>Who dying on the coast of Ithaca,</p>
					<p class="i2">The peasants gave the poor dumb thing a pittance:</p>
					<p>These to secure in this strong blowing weather,</p>
					<p>He caged in one huge hamper altogether.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then, having settled his marine affairs,</p>
					<p class="i2">Despatching single cruisers here and there,</p>
					<p>His vessel having need of some repairs,</p>
					<p class="i2">He shaped his course to where his daughter fair</p>
					<p>Continued still her hospitable cares;</p>
					<p class="i2">But that part of the coast being shoal and bare,</p>
					<p>And rough with reefs which ran out many a mile,</p>
					<p>His port lay on the other side o' the isle.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And there he went ashore without delay,</p>
					<p class="i2">Having no custom-house nor quarantine</p>
					<p>To ask him awkward questions on the way,</p>
					<p class="i2">About the time and place where he had been:</p>
					<p>He left his ship to be hove down next day,</p>
					<p class="i2">With orders to the people to careen;</p>
					<p>So that all hands were busy beyond measure,</p>
					<p>In getting out goods, ballast, guns, and treasure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Arriving at the summit of a hill</p>
					<p class="i2">Which overlooked the white walls of his home,</p>
					<p>He stopped.—What singular emotions fill</p>
					<p class="i2">Their bosoms who have been induced to roam!</p>
					<p>With fluttering doubts if all be well or ill—</p>
					<p class="i2">With love for many, and with fears for some;</p>
					<p>All feelings which o'erleap the years long lost,</p>
					<p>And bring our hearts back to their starting-post.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The approach of home to husbands and to sires,</p>
					<p class="i2">After long travelling by land or water,</p>
					<p>Most naturally some small doubt inspires—</p>
					<p class="i2">A female family's a serious matter,</p>
					<p>(None trusts the sex more, or so much admires—</p>
					<p class="i2">But they hate flattery, so I never flatter);</p>
					<p>Wives in their husbands' absences grow subtler,</p>
					<p>And daughters sometimes run off with the butler.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>An honest gentleman at his return</p>
					<p class="i2">May not have the good fortune of Ulysses;</p>
					<p>Not all lone matrons for their husbands mourn,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or show the same dislike to suitors' kisses;</p>
					<p>The odds are that he finds a handsome urn</p>
					<p class="i2">To his memory—and two or three young misses</p>
					<p>Born to some friend, who holds his wife and riches—</p>
					<p>And that <i>his</i> Argus<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_177">[177]</a>—bites him by the breeches.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If single, probably his plighted Fair</p>
					<p class="i2">Has in his absence wedded some rich miser;</p>
					<p>But all the better, for the happy pair</p>
					<p class="i2">May quarrel, and, the lady growing wiser,</p>
					<p>He may resume his amatory care</p>
					<p class="i2">As cavalier servente, or despise her;</p>
					<p>And that his sorrow may not be a dumb one,</p>
					<p>Writes odes on the Inconstancy of Woman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And oh! ye gentlemen who have already</p>
					<p class="i2">Some chaste <i>liaison</i> of the kind—I mean</p>
					<p>An honest friendship with a married lady—</p>
					<p class="i2">The only thing of this sort ever seen</p>
					<p>To last—of all connections the most steady,</p>
					<p class="i2">And the true Hymen, (the first's but a screen)—</p>
					<p>Yet, for all that, keep not too long away—</p>
					<p>I've known the absent wronged four times a day.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CL">[CL]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lambro, our sea-solicitor, who had</p>
					<p class="i2">Much less experience of dry land than Ocean,</p>
					<p>On seeing his own chimney-smoke, felt glad;</p>
					<p class="i2">But not knowing metaphysics, had no notion</p>
					<p>Of the true reason of his not being sad,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or that of any other strong emotion;</p>
					<p>He loved his child, and would have wept the loss of her,</p>
					<p>But knew the cause no more than a philosopher.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He saw his white walls shining in the sun,</p>
					<p class="i2">His garden trees all shadowy and green;</p>
					<p>He heard his rivulet's light bubbling run,</p>
					<p class="i2">The distant dog-bark; and perceived between</p>
					<p>The umbrage of the wood, so cool and dun,</p>
					<p class="i2">The moving figures, and the sparkling sheen</p>
					<p>Of arms (in the East all arm)—and various dyes</p>
					<p>Of coloured garbs, as bright as butterflies.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And as the spot where they appear he nears,</p>
					<p class="i2">Surprised at these unwonted signs of idling,</p>
					<p>He hears—alas! no music of the spheres,</p>
					<p class="i2">But an unhallowed, earthly sound of fiddling!</p>
					<p>A melody which made him doubt his ears,</p>
					<p class="i2">The cause being past his guessing or unriddling;</p>
					<p>A pipe, too, and a drum, and shortly after—</p>
					<p>A most unoriental roar of laughter.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And still more nearly to the place advancing,</p>
					<p class="i2">Descending rather quickly the declivity,</p>
					<p>Through the waved branches o'er the greensward glancing,</p>
					<p class="i2">'Midst other indications of festivity,</p>
					<p>Seeing a troop of his domestics dancing</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Dervises, who turn as on a pivot, he</p>
					<p>Perceived it was the Pyrrhic dance<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_178">[178]</a> so martial,</p>
					<p>To which the Levantines are very partial.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And further on a troop of Grecian girls,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_179">[179]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The first and tallest her white kerchief waving,</p>
					<p>Were strung together like a row of pearls,</p>
					<p class="i2">Linked hand in hand, and dancing; each too having</p>
					<p>Down her white neck long floating auburn curls—</p>
					<p class="i2">(The least of which would set ten poets raving);<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CM">[CM]</a></p>
					<p>Their leader sang—and bounded to her song</p>
					<p>With choral step and voice the virgin throng.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And here, assembled cross-legged round their trays,</p>
					<p class="i2">Small social parties just begun to dine;</p>
					<p>Pilaus and meats of all sorts met the gaze,</p>
					<p class="i2">And flasks of Samian and of Chian wine,</p>
					<p>And sherbet cooling in the porous vase;</p>
					<p class="i2">Above them their dessert grew on its vine;—</p>
					<p>The orange and pomegranate nodding o'er,</p>
					<p>Dropped in their laps, scarce plucked, their mellow store.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A band of children, round a snow-white ram,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_180">[180]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">There wreathe his venerable horns with flowers;</p>
					<p>While peaceful as if still an unweaned lamb,</p>
					<p class="i2">The patriarch of the flock all gently cowers</p>
					<p>His sober head, majestically tame,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or eats from out the palm, or playful lowers</p>
					<p>His brow, as if in act to butt, and then</p>
					<p>Yielding to their small hands, draws back again.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Their classical profiles, and glittering dresses,</p>
					<p class="i2">Their large black eyes, and soft seraphic cheeks,</p>
					<p>Crimson as cleft pomegranates, their long tresses,</p>
					<p class="i2">The gesture which enchants, the eye that speaks,</p>
					<p>The innocence which happy childhood blesses,</p>
					<p class="i2">Made quite a picture of these little Greeks;</p>
					<p>So that the philosophical beholder</p>
					<p>Sighed for their sakes—that they should e'er grow older.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Afar, a dwarf buffoon stood telling tales</p>
					<p class="i2">To a sedate grey circle of old smokers,</p>
					<p>Of secret treasures found in hidden vales,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of wonderful replies from Arab jokers,</p>
					<p>Of charms to make good gold and cure bad ails,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of rocks bewitched that open to the knockers,</p>
					<p>Of magic ladies who, by one sole act,</p>
					<p>Transformed their lords to beasts (but that's a fact).</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here was no lack of innocent diversion</p>
					<p class="i2">For the imagination or the senses,</p>
					<p>Song, dance, wine, music, stories from the Persian,</p>
					<p class="i2">All pretty pastimes in which no offence is;</p>
					<p>But Lambro saw all these things with aversion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Perceiving in his absence such expenses,</p>
					<p>Dreading that climax of all human ills,</p>
					<p>The inflammation of his weekly bills.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ah! what is man? what perils still environ<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_181">[181]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The happiest mortals even after dinner!</p>
					<p>A day of gold from out an age of iron</p>
					<p class="i2">Is all that Life allows the luckiest sinner;</p>
					<p>Pleasure (whene'er she sings, at least) 's a Siren,</p>
					<p class="i2">That lures, to flay alive, the young beginner;</p>
					<p>Lambro's reception at his people's banquet</p>
					<p>Was such as fire accords to a wet blanket.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He—being a man who seldom used a word</p>
					<p class="i2">Too much, and wishing gladly to surprise</p>
					<p>(In general he surprised men with the sword)</p>
					<p class="i2">His daughter—had not sent before to advise</p>
					<p>Of his arrival, so that no one stirred;</p>
					<p class="i2">And long he paused to re-assure his eyes,</p>
					<p>In fact much more astonished than delighted,</p>
					<p>To find so much good company invited.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He did not know (alas! how men will lie)</p>
					<p class="i2">That a report (especially the Greeks)</p>
					<p>Avouched his death (such people never die),</p>
					<p class="i2">And put his house in mourning several weeks,—</p>
					<p>But now their eyes and also lips were dry;</p>
					<p class="i2">The bloom, too, had returned to Haidée's cheeks:</p>
					<p>Her tears, too, being returned into their fount,</p>
					<p>She now kept house upon her own account.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Hence all this rice, meat, dancing, wine, and fiddling,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which turned the isle into a place of pleasure;</p>
					<p>The servants all were getting drunk or idling,</p>
					<p class="i2">A life which made them happy beyond measure.</p>
					<p>Her father's hospitality seemed middling,</p>
					<p class="i2">Compared with what Haidée did with his treasure;</p>
					<p>'T was wonderful how things went on improving,</p>
					<p>While she had not one hour to spare from loving.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CN">[CN]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Perhaps you think, in stumbling on this feast,</p>
					<p class="i2">He flew into a passion, and in fact</p>
					<p>There was no mighty reason to be pleased;</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps you prophesy some sudden act,</p>
					<p>The whip, the rack, or dungeon at the least,</p>
					<p class="i2">To teach his people to be more exact,</p>
					<p>And that, proceeding at a very high rate,</p>
					<p>He showed the royal <i>penchants</i> of a pirate.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You're wrong.—He was the mildest mannered man</p>
					<p class="i2">That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat;</p>
					<p>With such true breeding of a gentleman,</p>
					<p class="i2">You never could divine his real thought;</p>
					<p>No courtier could, and scarcely woman can</p>
					<p class="i2">Gird more deceit within a petticoat;</p>
					<p>Pity he loved adventurous life's variety,</p>
					<p>He was so great a loss to good society.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Advancing to the nearest dinner tray,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tapping the shoulder of the nighest guest,</p>
					<p>With a peculiar smile, which, by the way,</p>
					<p class="i2">Boded no good, whatever it expressed,</p>
					<p>He asked the meaning of this holiday;</p>
					<p class="i2">The vinous Greek to whom he had addressed</p>
					<p>His question, much too merry to divine</p>
					<p>The questioner, filled up a glass of wine,</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And without turning his facetious head,</p>
					<p class="i2">Over his shoulder, with a Bacchant air,</p>
					<p>Presented the o'erflowing cup, and said,</p>
					<p class="i2">"Talking's dry work, I have no time to spare."</p>
					<p>A second hiccuped, "Our old Master's dead,</p>
					<p class="i2">You'd better ask our Mistress who's his heir."</p>
					<p>"Our Mistress!" quoth a third: "Our Mistress!—pooh!—</p>
					<p>You mean our Master—not the old, but new."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>These rascals, being new comers, knew not whom</p>
					<p class="i2">They thus addressed—and Lambro's visage fell—</p>
					<p>And o'er his eye a momentary gloom</p>
					<p class="i2">Passed, but he strove quite courteously to quell</p>
					<p>The expression, and endeavouring to resume</p>
					<p class="i2">His smile, requested one of them to tell</p>
					<p>The name and quality of his new patron,</p>
					<p>Who seemed to have turned Haidée into a matron.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"I know not," quoth the fellow, "who or what</p>
					<p class="i2">He is, nor whence he came—and little care;</p>
					<p>But this I know, that this roast capon's fat,</p>
					<p class="i2">And that good wine ne'er washed down better fare;</p>
					<p>And if you are not satisfied with that,</p>
					<p class="i2">Direct your questions to my neighbour there;</p>
					<p>He'll answer all for better or for worse,</p>
					<p>For none likes more to hear himself converse."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_182">[182]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I said that Lambro was a man of patience,</p>
					<p class="i2">And certainly he showed the best of breeding,</p>
					<p>Which scarce even France, the Paragon of nations,</p>
					<p class="i2">E'er saw her most polite of sons exceeding;</p>
					<p>He bore these sneers against his near relations,</p>
					<p class="i2">His own anxiety, his heart, too, bleeding,</p>
					<p>The insults, too, of every servile glutton,</p>
					<p>Who all the time was eating up his mutton.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now in a person used to much command—</p>
					<p class="i2">To bid men come, and go, and come again—</p>
					<p>To see his orders done, too, out of hand—</p>
					<p class="i2">Whether the word was death, or but the chain—</p>
					<p>It may seem strange to find his manners bland;</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet such things are, which I cannot explain,</p>
					<p>Though, doubtless, he who can command himself</p>
					<p>Is good to govern—almost as a Guelf.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Not that he was not sometimes rash or so,</p>
					<p class="i2">But never in his real and serious mood;</p>
					<p>Then calm, concentrated, and still, and slow,</p>
					<p class="i2">He lay coiled like the Boa in the wood;</p>
					<p>With him it never was a word and blow,</p>
					<p class="i2">His angry word once o'er, he shed no blood,</p>
					<p>But in his silence there was much to rue,</p>
					<p>And his <i>one</i> blow left little work for <i>two</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He asked no further questions, and proceeded</p>
					<p class="i2">On to the house, but by a private way,</p>
					<p>So that the few who met him hardly heeded,</p>
					<p class="i2">So little they expected him that day;</p>
					<p>If love paternal in his bosom pleaded</p>
					<p class="i2">For Haidée's sake, is more than I can say,</p>
					<p>But certainly to one deemed dead returning,</p>
					<p>This revel seemed a curious mode of mourning.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If all the dead could now return to life,</p>
					<p class="i2">(Which God forbid!) or some, or a great many,</p>
					<p>For instance, if a husband or his wife<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CO">[CO]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">(Nuptial examples are as good as any),</p>
					<p>No doubt whate'er might be their former strife,</p>
					<p class="i2">The present weather would be much more rainy—</p>
					<p>Tears shed into the grave of the connection</p>
					<p>Would share most probably its resurrection.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He entered in the house no more his home,</p>
					<p class="i2">A thing to human feelings the most trying,</p>
					<p>And harder for the heart to overcome,</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps, than even the mental pangs of dying;</p>
					<p>To find our hearthstone turned into a tomb,</p>
					<p class="i2">And round its once warm precincts palely lying</p>
					<p>The ashes of our hopes, is a deep grief,</p>
					<p>Beyond a <i>single gentleman's</i> belief.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He entered in the house—his home no more,</p>
					<p class="i2">For without hearts there is no home;—and felt</p>
					<p>The solitude of passing his own door</p>
					<p class="i2">Without a welcome: <i>there</i> he long had dwelt,</p>
					<p>There his few peaceful days Time had swept o'er,</p>
					<p class="i2">There his worn bosom and keen eye would melt</p>
					<p>Over the innocence of that sweet child,</p>
					<p>His only shrine of feelings undefiled.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was a man of a strange temperament,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of mild demeanour though of savage mood,</p>
					<p>Moderate in all his habits, and content</p>
					<p class="i2">With temperance in pleasure, as in food,</p>
					<p>Quick to perceive, and strong to bear, and meant</p>
					<p class="i2">For something better, if not wholly good;</p>
					<p>His Country's wrongs and his despair to save her</p>
					<p>Had stung him from a slave to an enslaver.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The love of power, and rapid gain of gold,</p>
					<p class="i2">The hardness by long habitude produced,</p>
					<p>The dangerous life in which he had grown old,</p>
					<p class="i2">The mercy he had granted oft abused,</p>
					<p>The sights he was accustomed to behold,</p>
					<p class="i2">The wild seas, and wild men with whom he cruised,</p>
					<p>Had cost his enemies a long repentance,</p>
					<p>And made him a good friend, but bad acquaintance.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But something of the spirit of old Greece</p>
					<p class="i2">Flashed o'er his soul a few heroic rays,</p>
					<p>Such as lit onward to the Golden Fleece</p>
					<p class="i2">His predecessors in the Colchian days;</p>
					<p>'T is true he had no ardent love for peace—</p>
					<p class="i2">Alas! his country showed no path to praise:</p>
					<p>Hate to the world and war with every nation</p>
					<p>He waged, in vengeance of her degradation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Still o'er his mind the influence of the clime</p>
					<p class="i2">Shed its Ionian elegance, which showed</p>
					<p>Its power unconsciously full many a time,—</p>
					<p class="i2">A taste seen in the choice of his abode,</p>
					<p>A love of music and of scenes sublime,</p>
					<p class="i2">A pleasure in the gentle stream that flowed</p>
					<p>Past him in crystal, and a joy in flowers,</p>
					<p>Bedewed his spirit in his calmer hours.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But whatsoe'er he had of love reposed</p>
					<p class="i2">On that belovéd daughter; she had been</p>
					<p>The only thing which kept his heart unclosed</p>
					<p class="i2">Amidst the savage deeds he had done and seen,</p>
					<p>A lonely pure affection unopposed:</p>
					<p class="i2">There wanted but the loss of this to wean</p>
					<p>His feelings from all milk of human kindness,</p>
					<p>And turn him like the Cyclops mad with blindness.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CP">[CP]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The cubless tigress in her jungle raging</p>
					<p class="i2">Is dreadful to the shepherd and the flock;</p>
					<p>The Ocean when its yeasty war is waging</p>
					<p class="i2">Is awful to the vessel near the rock;</p>
					<p>But violent things will sooner bear assuaging,</p>
					<p class="i2">Their fury being spent by its own shock,</p>
					<p>Than the stern, single, deep, and wordless ire<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CQ">[CQ]</a></p>
					<p>Of a strong human heart, and in a Sire.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It is a hard although a common case</p>
					<p class="i2">To find our children running restive—they</p>
					<p>In whom our brightest days we would retrace,</p>
					<p class="i2">Our little selves re-formed in finer clay,</p>
					<p>Just as old age is creeping on apace,</p>
					<p class="i2">And clouds come o'er the sunset of our day,</p>
					<p>They kindly leave us, though not quite alone,</p>
					<p>But in good company—the gout or stone.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet a fine family is a fine thing</p>
					<p class="i2">(Provided they don't come in after dinner);</p>
					<p>'T is beautiful to see a matron bring</p>
					<p class="i2">Her children up (if nursing them don't thin her);</p>
					<p>Like cherubs round an altar-piece they cling</p>
					<p class="i2">To the fire-side (a sight to touch a sinner).</p>
					<p>A lady with her daughters or her nieces</p>
					<p>Shine like a guinea and seven-shilling pieces.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Old Lambro passed unseen a private gate,</p>
					<p class="i2">And stood within his hall at eventide;</p>
					<p>Meantime the lady and her lover sate</p>
					<p class="i2">At wassail in their beauty and their pride:</p>
					<p>An ivory inlaid table spread with state</p>
					<p class="i2">Before them, and fair slaves on every side;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_183">[183]</a></p>
					<p>Gems, gold, and silver, formed the service mostly,</p>
					<p>Mother of pearl and coral the less costly.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The dinner made about a hundred dishes;</p>
					<p class="i2">Lamb and pistachio nuts—in short, all meats,</p>
					<p>And saffron soups, and sweetbreads; and the fishes</p>
					<p class="i2">Were of the finest that e'er flounced in nets,</p>
					<p>Dressed to a Sybarite's most pampered wishes;</p>
					<p class="i2">The beverage was various sherbets</p>
					<p>Of raisin, orange, and pomegranate juice,</p>
					<p>Squeezed through the rind, which makes it best for use.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>These were ranged round, each in its crystal ewer,</p>
					<p class="i2">And fruits, and date-bread loaves closed the repast,</p>
					<p>And Mocha's berry, from Arabia pure,</p>
					<p class="i2">In small fine China cups, came in at last;</p>
					<p>Gold cups of filigree, made to secure</p>
					<p class="i2">The hand from burning, underneath them placed;</p>
					<p>Cloves, cinnamon, and saffron too were boiled</p>
					<p>Up with the coffee, which (I think) they spoiled.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The hangings of the room were tapestry, made</p>
					<p class="i2">Of velvet panels, each of different hue,</p>
					<p>And thick with damask flowers of silk inlaid;</p>
					<p class="i2">And round them ran a yellow border too;</p>
					<p>The upper border, richly wrought, displayed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Embroidered delicately o'er with blue,</p>
					<p>Soft Persian sentences, in lilac letters,</p>
					<p>From poets, or the moralists their betters.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>These Oriental writings on the wall,</p>
					<p class="i2">Quite common in those countries, are a kind</p>
					<p>Of monitors adapted to recall,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like skulls at Memphian banquets, to the mind,</p>
					<p>The words which shook Belshazzar in his hall,</p>
					<p class="i2">And took his kingdom from him: You will find,</p>
					<p>Though sages may pour out their wisdom's treasure,</p>
					<p>There is no sterner moralist than Pleasure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A Beauty at the season's close grown hectic,</p>
					<p class="i2">A Genius who has drunk himself to death,</p>
					<p>A Rake turned methodistic, or Eclectic—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_184">[184]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">(For that's the name they like to pray beneath)—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CR">[CR]</a></p>
					<p>But most, an Alderman struck apoplectic,</p>
					<p class="i2">Are things that really take away the breath,—</p>
					<p>And show that late hours, wine, and love are able</p>
					<p>To do not much less damage than the table.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Haidée and Juan carpeted their feet</p>
					<p class="i2">On crimson satin, bordered with pale blue;</p>
					<p>Their sofa occupied three parts complete</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the apartment—and appeared quite new;</p>
					<p>The velvet cushions (for a throne more meet)</p>
					<p class="i2">Were scarlet, from whose glowing centre grew</p>
					<p>A sun embossed in gold, whose rays of tissue,</p>
					<p>Meridian-like, were seen all light to issue.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CS">[CS]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Crystal and marble, plate and porcelain,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had done their work of splendour; Indian mats</p>
					<p>And Persian carpets, which the heart bled to stain,</p>
					<p class="i2">Over the floors were spread; gazelles and cats,</p>
					<p>And dwarfs and blacks, and such like things, that gain</p>
					<p class="i2">Their bread as ministers and favourites (that's</p>
					<p>To say, by degradation) mingled there</p>
					<p>As plentiful as in a court, or fair.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was no want of lofty mirrors, and</p>
					<p class="i2">The tables, most of ebony inlaid</p>
					<p>With mother of pearl or ivory, stood at hand,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or were of tortoise-shell or rare woods made,</p>
					<p>Fretted with gold or silver:—by command</p>
					<p class="i2">The greater part of these were ready spread</p>
					<p>With viands and sherbets in ice—and wine—</p>
					<p>Kept for all comers at all hours to dine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of all the dresses I select Haidée's:</p>
					<p class="i2">She wore two jelicks—one was of pale yellow;</p>
					<p>Of azure, pink, and white was her chemise—</p>
					<p class="i2">'Neath which her breast heaved like a little billow:</p>
					<p>With buttons formed of pearls as large as peas,</p>
					<p class="i2">All gold and crimson shone her jelick's fellow,</p>
					<p>And the striped white gauze baracan that bound her,</p>
					<p>Like fleecy clouds about the moon, flowed round her.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>One large gold bracelet clasped each lovely arm,</p>
					<p class="i2">Lockless—so pliable from the pure gold</p>
					<p>That the hand stretched and shut it without harm,</p>
					<p class="i2">The limb which it adorned its only mould;</p>
					<p>So beautiful—its very shape would charm,</p>
					<p class="i2">And clinging, as if loath to lose its hold,</p>
					<p>The purest ore enclosed the whitest skin</p>
					<p>That e'er by precious metal was held in.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_185">[185]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Around, as Princess of her father's land,</p>
					<p class="i2">A like gold bar above her instep rolled<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_186">[186]</a></p>
					<p>Announced her rank; twelve rings were on her hand;</p>
					<p class="i2">Her hair was starred with gems; her veil's fine fold</p>
					<p>Below her breast was fastened with a band</p>
					<p class="i2">Of lavish pearls, whose worth could scarce be told;</p>
					<p>Her orange silk full Turkish trousers furled</p>
					<p>About the prettiest ankle in the world.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her hair's long auburn waves down to her heel</p>
					<p class="i2">Flowed like an Alpine torrent which the sun</p>
					<p>Dyes with his morning light,—and would conceal</p>
					<p class="i2">Her person<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_187">[187]</a> if allowed at large to run,</p>
					<p>And still they seemed resentfully to feel</p>
					<p class="i2">The silken fillet's curb, and sought to shun</p>
					<p>Their bonds whene'er some Zephyr caught began</p>
					<p>To offer his young pinion as her fan.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Round her she made an atmosphere of life,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_188">[188]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The very air seemed lighter from her eyes,</p>
					<p>They were so soft and beautiful, and rife</p>
					<p class="i2">With all we can imagine of the skies,</p>
					<p>And pure as Psyche ere she grew a wife—</p>
					<p class="i2">Too pure even for the purest human ties;</p>
					<p>Her overpowering presence made you feel</p>
					<p>It would not be idolatry to kneel.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_189">[189]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her eyelashes, though dark as night, were tinged</p>
					<p class="i2">(It is the country's custom, but in vain),</p>
					<p>For those large black eyes were so blackly fringed,</p>
					<p class="i2">The glossy rebels mocked the jetty stain,</p>
					<p>And in their native beauty stood avenged:</p>
					<p class="i2">Her nails were touched with henna; but, again,</p>
					<p>The power of Art was turned to nothing, for</p>
					<p>They could not look more rosy than before.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The henna should be deeply dyed to make</p>
					<p class="i2">The skin relieved appear more fairly fair;</p>
					<p>She had no need of this, day ne'er will break</p>
					<p class="i2">On mountain tops more heavenly white than her:</p>
					<p>The eye might doubt if it were well awake,</p>
					<p class="i2">She was so like a vision; I might err,</p>
					<p>But Shakespeare also says, 't is very silly</p>
					<p>"To gild refinéd gold, or paint the lily."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_190">[190]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan had on a shawl of black and gold,</p>
					<p class="i2">But a white baracan, and so transparent</p>
					<p>The sparkling gems beneath you might behold,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like small stars through the milky way apparent;</p>
					<p>His turban, furled in many a graceful fold,</p>
					<p class="i2">An emerald aigrette, with Haidée's hair in't,</p>
					<p>Surmounted as its clasp—a glowing crescent,</p>
					<p>Whose rays shone ever trembling, but incessant.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And now they were diverted by their suite,</p>
					<p class="i2">Dwarfs, dancing girls, black eunuchs, and a poet,</p>
					<p>Which made their new establishment complete;</p>
					<p class="i2">The last was of great fame, and liked to show it;</p>
					<p>His verses rarely wanted their due feet—</p>
					<p class="i2">And for his theme—he seldom sung below it,</p>
					<p>He being paid to satirise or flatter,</p>
					<p>As the Psalm says, "inditing a good matter."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He praised the present, and abused the past,</p>
					<p class="i2">Reversing the good custom of old days,</p>
					<p>An Eastern anti-jacobin at last</p>
					<p class="i2">He turned, preferring pudding to <i>no</i> praise—</p>
					<p>For some few years his lot had been o'ercast</p>
					<p class="i2">By his seeming independent in his lays,</p>
					<p>But now he sung the Sultan and the Pacha—</p>
					<p>With truth like Southey, and with verse<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_191">[191]</a> like Crashaw.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CT">[CT]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was a man who had seen many changes,</p>
					<p class="i2">And always changed as true as any needle;</p>
					<p>His Polar Star being one which rather ranges,</p>
					<p class="i2">And not the fixed—he knew the way to wheedle:</p>
					<p>So vile he 'scaped the doom which oft avenges;</p>
					<p class="i2">And being fluent (save indeed when fee'd ill),</p>
					<p>He lied with such a fervour of intention—</p>
					<p>There was no doubt he earned his laureate pension.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But <i>he</i> had genius,—when a turncoat has it,</p>
					<p class="i2">The <i>Vates irritabilis</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_192">[192]</a> takes care</p>
					<p>That without notice few full moons shall pass it;</p>
					<p class="i2">Even good men like to make the public stare:—</p>
					<p>But to my subject—let me see—what was it?—</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh!—the third canto—and the pretty pair—</p>
					<p>Their loves, and feasts, and house, and dress, and mode</p>
					<p>Of living in their insular abode.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Their poet, a sad trimmer, but, no less,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CU">[CU]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">In company a very pleasant fellow,</p>
					<p>Had been the favourite of full many a mess</p>
					<p class="i2">Of men, and made them speeches when half mellow;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CV">[CV]</a></p>
					<p>And though his meaning they could rarely guess,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet still they deigned to hiccup or to bellow</p>
					<p>The glorious meed of popular applause,</p>
					<p>Of which the first ne'er knows the second cause.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CW">[CW]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But now being lifted into high society,</p>
					<p class="i2">And having picked up several odds and ends</p>
					<p>Of free thoughts in his travels for variety,</p>
					<p class="i2">He deemed, being in a lone isle, among friends,</p>
					<p>That, without any danger of a riot, he</p>
					<p class="i2">Might for long lying make himself amends;</p>
					<p>And, singing as he sung in his warm youth,</p>
					<p>Agree to a short armistice with Truth.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He had travelled 'mongst the Arabs, Turks, and Franks,</p>
					<p class="i2">And knew the self-loves of the different nations;</p>
					<p>And having lived with people of all ranks,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had something ready upon most occasions—</p>
					<p>Which got him a few presents and some thanks.</p>
					<p class="i2">He varied with some skill his adulations;</p>
					<p>To "do at Rome as Romans do,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_193">[193]</a> a piece</p>
					<p>Of conduct was which <i>he</i> observed in Greece.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus, usually, when <i>he</i> was asked to sing,</p>
					<p class="i2">He gave the different nations something national;</p>
					<p>'T was all the same to him—"God save the King,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Or "Ça ira," according to the fashion all:</p>
					<p>His Muse made increment of anything,</p>
					<p class="i2">From the high lyric down to the low rational;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CX">[CX]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_194">[194]</a></p>
					<p>If Pindar sang horse-races, what should hinder</p>
					<p>Himself from being as pliable as Pindar?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In France, for instance, he would write a chanson;</p>
					<p class="i2">In England a six canto quarto tale;</p>
					<p>In Spain he'd make a ballad or romance on</p>
					<p class="i2">The last war—much the same in Portugal;</p>
					<p>In Germany, the Pegasus he'd prance on</p>
					<p class="i2">Would be old Goethe's—(see what says De Staël);<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_195">[195]</a></p>
					<p>In Italy he'd ape the "Trecentisti;"</p>
					<p>In Greece, he'd sing some sort of hymn like this t' ye:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_196">[196]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>1.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Isles of Greece, the Isles of Greece!</p>
					<p class="i2">Where burning Sappho loved and sung,</p>
					<p>Where grew the arts of War and Peace,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!</p>
					<p>Eternal summer gilds them yet,</p>
					<p>But all, except their Sun, is set.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>2.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Scian and the Teian muse,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Hero's harp, the Lover's lute,</p>
					<p>Have found the fame your shores refuse:</p>
					<p class="i2">Their place of birth alone is mute</p>
					<p>To sounds which echo further west</p>
					<p>Than your Sires' "Islands of the Blest."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_197">[197]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>3.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The mountains look on Marathon—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CY">[CY]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And Marathon looks on the sea;</p>
					<p>And musing there an hour alone,</p>
					<p class="i2">I dreamed that Greece might still be free;</p>
					<p>For standing on the Persians' grave,</p>
					<p>I could not deem myself a slave.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>4.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_198">[198]</a></h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A King sate on the rocky brow</p>
					<p class="i2">Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;</p>
					<p>And ships, by thousands, lay below,</p>
					<p class="i2">And men in nations;—all were his!</p>
					<p>He counted them at break of day—</p>
					<p>And, when the Sun set, where were they?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>5.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And where are they? and where art thou,</p>
					<p class="i2">My Country? On thy voiceless shore</p>
					<p>The heroic lay is tuneless now—</p>
					<p class="i2">The heroic bosom beats no more!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_CZ">[CZ]</a></p>
					<p>And must thy Lyre, so long divine,</p>
					<p>Degenerate into hands like mine?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>6.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is something, in the dearth of Fame,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though linked among a fettered race,</p>
					<p>To feel at least a patriot's shame,</p>
					<p class="i2">Even as I sing, suffuse my face;</p>
					<p>For what is left the poet here?</p>
					<p>For Greeks a blush—for Greece a tear.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>7.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Must <i>we</i> but weep o'er days more blest?</p>
					<p class="i2">Must <i>we</i> but blush?—Our fathers bled.</p>
					<p>Earth! render back from out thy breast</p>
					<p class="i2">A remnant of our Spartan dead!</p>
					<p>Of the three hundred grant but three,</p>
					<p>To make a new Thermopylæ!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>8.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What, silent still? and silent all?</p>
					<p class="i2">Ah! no;—the voices of the dead</p>
					<p>Sound like a distant torrent's fall,</p>
					<p class="i2">And answer, "Let one living head,</p>
					<p>But one arise,—we come, we come!"</p>
					<p>'T is but the living who are dumb.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>9.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In vain—in vain: strike other chords;</p>
					<p class="i2">Fill high the cup with Samian wine!</p>
					<p>Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,</p>
					<p class="i2">And shed the blood of Scio's vine!</p>
					<p>Hark! rising to the ignoble call—</p>
					<p>How answers each bold Bacchanal!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>10.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_199">[199]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?</p>
					<p>Of two such lessons, why forget</p>
					<p class="i2">The nobler and the manlier one?</p>
					<p>You have the letters Cadmus gave—</p>
					<p>Think ye he meant them for a slave?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>11.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</p>
					<p class="i2">We will not think of themes like these!</p>
					<p>It made Anacreon's song divine:</p>
					<p class="i2">He served—but served Polycrates—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_200">[200]</a></p>
					<p>A Tyrant; but our masters then</p>
					<p>Were still, at least, our countrymen.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>12.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Tyrant of the Chersonese</p>
					<p class="i2">Was Freedom's best and bravest friend;</p>
					<p><i>That</i> tyrant was Miltiades!</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh! that the present hour would lend</p>
					<p>Another despot of the kind!</p>
					<p>Such chains as his were sure to bind.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>13.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</p>
					<p class="i2">On Suli's rock, and Parga's shore,</p>
					<p>Exists the remnant of a line</p>
					<p class="i2">Such as the Doric mothers bore;</p>
					<p>And there, perhaps, some seed is sown,</p>
					<p>The Heracleidan blood might own.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DA">[DA]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>14.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Trust not for freedom to the Franks—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_201">[201]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">They have a king who buys and sells;</p>
					<p>In native swords, and native ranks,</p>
					<p class="i2">The only hope of courage dwells;</p>
					<p>But Turkish force, and Latin fraud,</p>
					<p>Would break your shield, however broad.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>15.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</p>
					<p class="i2">Our virgins dance beneath the shade—</p>
					<p>I see their glorious black eyes shine;</p>
					<p class="i2">But gazing on each glowing maid,</p>
					<p>My own the burning tear-drop laves,</p>
					<p>To think such breasts must suckle slaves.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>16.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_202">[202]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Where nothing, save the waves and I,</p>
					<p>May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;</p>
					<p class="i2">There, swan-like, let me sing and die:</p>
					<p>A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine—</p>
					<p>Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus sung, or would, or could, or should have sung,</p>
					<p class="i2">The modern Greek, in tolerable verse;</p>
					<p>If not like Orpheus quite, when Greece was young,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet in these times he might have done much worse:</p>
					<p>His strain displayed some feeling—right or wrong;</p>
					<p class="i2">And feeling,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_203">[203]</a> in a poet, is the source</p>
					<p>Of others' feeling; but they are such liars,</p>
					<p>And take all colours—like the hands of dyers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But words are things,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_204">[204]</a> and a small drop of ink,</p>
					<p class="i2">Falling like dew, upon a thought, produces</p>
					<p>That which makes thousands, perhaps millions, think;</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is strange, the shortest letter which man uses</p>
					<p>Instead of speech, may form a lasting link</p>
					<p class="i2">Of ages; to what straits old Time reduces</p>
					<p>Frail man, when paper—even a rag like this,</p>
					<p>Survives himself, his tomb, and all that's his!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And when his bones are dust, his grave a blank,</p>
					<p class="i2">His station, generation, even his nation,</p>
					<p>Become a thing, or nothing, save to rank</p>
					<p class="i2">In chronological commemoration,</p>
					<p>Some dull MS. Oblivion long has sank,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or graven stone found in a barrack's station</p>
					<p>In digging the foundation of a closet,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DB">[DB]</a></p>
					<p>May turn his name up, as a rare deposit.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Glory long has made the sages smile;</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is something, nothing, words, illusion, wind—</p>
					<p>Depending more upon the historian's style</p>
					<p class="i2">Than on the name a person leaves behind:</p>
					<p>Troy owes to Homer what whist owes to Hoyle:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_205">[205]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The present century was growing blind</p>
					<p>To the great Marlborough's skill in giving knocks,</p>
					<p>Until his late Life by Archdeacon Coxe.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_206">[206]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Milton's the Prince of poets—so we say;</p>
					<p class="i2">A little heavy, but no less divine:</p>
					<p>An independent being in his day—</p>
					<p class="i2">Learned, pious, temperate in love and wine;</p>
					<p>But, his life falling into Johnson's way,</p>
					<p class="i2">We're told this great High Priest of all the Nine</p>
					<p>Was whipped at college—a harsh sire—odd spouse,</p>
					<p>For the first Mrs. Milton left his house.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_207">[207]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All these are, <i>certes</i>, entertaining facts,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Shakespeare's stealing deer, Lord Bacon's bribes;</p>
					<p>Like Titus' youth, and Cæsar's earliest acts;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_208">[208]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Like Burns (whom Doctor Currie well describes);<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_209">[209]</a></p>
					<p>Like Cromwell's pranks;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_210">[210]</a>—but although Truth exacts</p>
					<p class="i2">These amiable descriptions from the scribes,</p>
					<p>As most essential to their Hero's story,</p>
					<p>They do not much contribute to his glory.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All are not moralists, like Southey, when</p>
					<p class="i2">He prated to the world of "Pantisocracy;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_211">[211]</a></p>
					<p>Or Wordsworth unexcised,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_212">[212]</a> unhired, who then</p>
					<p class="i2">Seasoned his pedlar poems with Democracy;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DC">[DC]</a></p>
					<p>Or Coleridge<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_213">[213]</a> long before his flighty pen</p>
					<p class="i2">Let to the Morning Post its aristocracy;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DD">[DD]</a></p>
					<p>When he and Southey, following the same path,</p>
					<p>Espoused two partners (milliners of Bath).<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_214">[214]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Such names at present cut a convict figure,</p>
					<p class="i2">The very Botany Bay in moral geography;</p>
					<p>Their loyal treason, renegado rigour,</p>
					<p class="i2">Are good manure for their more bare biography;</p>
					<p>Wordsworth's last quarto, by the way, is bigger</p>
					<p class="i2">Than any since the birthday of typography;</p>
					<p>A drowsy, frowzy poem, called the "Excursion,"</p>
					<p>Writ in a manner which is my aversion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He there builds up a formidable dyke</p>
					<p class="i2">Between his own and others' intellect;</p>
					<p>But Wordsworth's poem, and his followers, like</p>
					<p class="i2">Joanna Southcote's Shiloh<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_215">[215]</a> and her sect,</p>
					<p>Are things which in this century don't strike</p>
					<p class="i2">The public mind,—so few are the elect;</p>
					<p>And the new births of both their stale Virginities</p>
					<p>Have proved but Dropsies, taken for Divinities.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But let me to my story: I must own,</p>
					<p class="i2">If I have any fault, it is digression,</p>
					<p>Leaving my people to proceed alone,</p>
					<p class="i2">While I soliloquize beyond expression:</p>
					<p>But these are my addresses from the throne,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which put off business to the ensuing session:</p>
					<p>Forgetting each omission is a loss to</p>
					<p>The world, not quite so great as Ariosto.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I know that what our neighbours call <i>"longueurs,"</i></p>
					<p class="i2">(We've not so good a <i>word</i>, but have the <i>thing</i>,</p>
					<p>In that complete perfection which insures</p>
					<p class="i2">An epic from Bob Southey every spring—)</p>
					<p>Form not the true temptation which allures</p>
					<p class="i2">The reader; but 't would not be hard to bring</p>
					<p>Some fine examples of the <i>Epopée</i>,</p>
					<p>To prove its grand ingredient is <i>Ennui</i>.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_216">[216]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>We learn from Horace, "Homer sometimes sleeps;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_217">[217]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">We feel without him,—Wordsworth sometimes wakes,—</p>
					<p>To show with what complacency he creeps,</p>
					<p class="i2">With his dear "<i>Waggoners</i>," around his lakes.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_218">[218]</a></p>
					<p>He wishes for "a boat" to sail the deeps—</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Ocean?—No, of air; and then he makes</p>
					<p>Another outcry for "a little boat,"</p>
					<p>And drivels seas to set it well afloat.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_219">[219]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If he must fain sweep o'er the ethereal plain,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Pegasus runs restive in his "Waggon,"</p>
					<p>Could he not beg the loan of Charles's Wain?</p>
					<p class="i2">Or pray Medea for a single dragon?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_220">[220]</a></p>
					<p>Or if, too classic for his vulgar brain,</p>
					<p class="i2">He feared his neck to venture such a nag on,</p>
					<p>And he must needs mount nearer to the moon,</p>
					<p>Could not the blockhead ask for a balloon?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>C.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Pedlars," and "Boats," and "Waggons!" Oh! ye shades</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Pope and Dryden, are we come to this?</p>
					<p>That trash of such sort not alone evades</p>
					<p class="i2">Contempt, but from the bathos' vast abyss</p>
					<p>Floats scumlike uppermost, and these Jack Cades</p>
					<p class="i2">Of sense and song above your graves may hiss—</p>
					<p>The "little boatman" and his <i>Peter Bell</i></p>
					<p>Can sneer at him who drew "Achitophel!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_221">[221]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>T' our tale.—The feast was over, the slaves gone,</p>
					<p class="i2">The dwarfs and dancing girls had all retired;</p>
					<p>The Arab lore and Poet's song were done,</p>
					<p class="i2">And every sound of revelry expired;</p>
					<p>The lady and her lover, left alone,</p>
					<p class="i2">The rosy flood of Twilight's sky admired;—</p>
					<p>Ave Maria! o'er the earth and sea,</p>
					<p>That heavenliest hour of Heaven is worthiest thee!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ave Maria! blesséd be the hour!</p>
					<p class="i2">The time, the clime, the spot, where I so oft</p>
					<p>Have felt that moment in its fullest power</p>
					<p class="i2">Sink o'er the earth—so beautiful and soft—</p>
					<p>While swung the deep bell in the distant tower,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DE">[DE]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Or the faint dying day-hymn stole aloft,</p>
					<p>And not a breath crept through the rosy air,</p>
					<p>And yet the forest leaves seemed stirred with prayer.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ave Maria! 't is the hour of prayer!</p>
					<p class="i2">Ave Maria! 't is the hour of Love!</p>
					<p>Ave Maria! may our spirits dare</p>
					<p class="i2">Look up to thine and to thy Son's above!</p>
					<p>Ave Maria! oh that face so fair!</p>
					<p class="i2">Those downcast eyes beneath the Almighty Dove—</p>
					<p>What though 't is but a pictured image?—strike—</p>
					<p>That painting is no idol,—'t is too like.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some kinder casuists are pleased to say,</p>
					<p class="i2">In nameless print<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DF">[DF]</a>—that I have no devotion;</p>
					<p>But set those persons down with me to pray,</p>
					<p class="i2">And you shall see who has the properest notion</p>
					<p>Of getting into Heaven the shortest way;</p>
					<p class="i2">My altars are the mountains and the Ocean,</p>
					<p>Earth—air—stars,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_222">[222]</a>—all that springs from the great Whole,</p>
					<p>Who hath produced, and will receive the Soul.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sweet Hour of Twilight!—in the solitude</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the pine forest, and the silent shore</p>
					<p>Which bounds Ravenna's immemorial wood,</p>
					<p class="i2">Rooted where once the Adrian wave flowed o'er,</p>
					<p>To where the last Cæsarean fortress stood,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_223">[223]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Evergreen forest! which Boccaccio's lore</p>
					<p>And Dryden's lay made haunted ground to me,</p>
					<p>How have I loved the twilight hour and thee!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_224">[224]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The shrill cicalas, people of the pine,</p>
					<p class="i2">Making their summer lives one ceaseless song,</p>
					<p>Were the sole echoes, save my steed's and mine,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Vesper bell's that rose the boughs along;</p>
					<p>The spectre huntsman of Onesti's line,</p>
					<p class="i2">His hell-dogs, and their chase, and the fair throng</p>
					<p>Which learned from this example not to fly</p>
					<p>From a true lover,—shadowed my mind's eye.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_225">[225]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, Hesperus! thou bringest all good things—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_226">[226]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Home to the weary, to the hungry cheer,</p>
					<p>To the young bird the parent's brooding wings,</p>
					<p class="i2">The welcome stall to the o'erlaboured steer;</p>
					<p>Whate'er of peace about our hearthstone clings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whate'er our household gods protect of dear,</p>
					<p>Are gathered round us by thy look of rest;</p>
					<p>Thou bring'st the child, too, to the mother's breast.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Soft Hour! which wakes the wish and melts the heart</p>
					<p class="i2">Of those who sail the seas, on the first day</p>
					<p>When they from their sweet friends are torn apart;</p>
					<p class="i2">Or fills with love the pilgrim on his way</p>
					<p>As the far bell of Vesper makes him start,</p>
					<p class="i2">Seeming to weep the dying day's decay;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_227">[227]</a></p>
					<p>Is this a fancy which our reason scorns?</p>
					<p>Ah! surely Nothing dies but Something mourns!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When Nero perished by the justest doom</p>
					<p class="i2">Which ever the Destroyer yet destroyed,</p>
					<p>Amidst the roar of liberated Rome,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of nations freed, and the world overjoyed,</p>
					<p>Some hands unseen strewed flowers upon his tomb:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_228">[228]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps the weakness of a heart not void</p>
					<p>Of feeling for some kindness done, when Power</p>
					<p>Had left the wretch an uncorrupted hour.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But I'm digressing; what on earth has Nero,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or any such like sovereign buffoons,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DG">[DG]</a></p>
					<p>To do with the transactions of my hero,</p>
					<p class="i2">More than such madmen's fellow man—the moon's?</p>
					<p>Sure my invention must be down at zero,</p>
					<p class="i2">And I grown one of many "Wooden Spoons"</p>
					<p>Of verse, (the name with which we Cantabs please</p>
					<p>To dub the last of honours in degrees).</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I feel this tediousness will never do—</p>
					<p class="i2">T' is being <i>too</i> epic, and I must cut down</p>
					<p>(In copying) this long canto into two;</p>
					<p class="i2">They'll never find it out, unless I own</p>
					<p>The fact, excepting some experienced few;</p>
					<p class="i2">And then as an improvement 't will be shown:</p>
					<p>I'll prove that such the opinion of the critic is</p>
					<p>From Aristotle <i>passim</i>.—See <span title="POIÊTIKÊS">ΠΟΙΗΤΙΚΗΣ</span>.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_229">[229]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_169"><span class="label">[169]</span></a> [November 30, 1819. Copied in 1820 (MS.D.). Moore (<i>Life</i>, 421) says that Byron was at work on the third canto when he stayed with him at Venice, in October, 1819. "One day, before dinner, [he] read me two or three hundred lines of it; beginning with the stanzas "Oh Wellington," etc., which, at the time, formed the opening of the third canto, but were afterwards reserved for the commencement of the ninth." The third canto, as it now stands, was completed by November 8, 1819; see <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 375. The date on the MS. may refer to the first fair copy.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CH"><span class="label">[CH]</span></a> {144}<i>And fits her like a stocking or a glove</i>.—[MS. D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_170"><span class="label">[170]</span></a> ["On peut trouver des femmes qui n'ont jamais eu de galanterie, mais il est rare d'en trouver qui n'en aient jamais eu qu'une."—<i>Réflexions</i> ... du Duc de la Rochefoucauld, No. lxxiii.</p>
					<p>Byron prefixed the maxim as a motto to his "Ode to a Lady whose Lover was killed by a Ball, which at the same time shivered a Portrait next his Heart."—<i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 552.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_171"><span class="label">[171]</span></a> {145}[<i>Merchant of Venice</i>, act iv. sc. 1, line 254.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CI">
							<span class="label">[CI]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Had Petrarch's passion led to Petrarch's wedding,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>How many sonnets had ensued the bedding?</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_172"><span class="label">[172]</span></a> [The Ballad of "Death and the Lady" was printed in a small volume, entitled <i>A Guide to Heaven</i>, 1736, 12mo. It is mentioned in <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i> (chap. xvii.), <i>Works of Oliver Goldsmith</i>, 1854, i. 369. See <i>Old English Popular Music</i>, by William Chappell, F.S.A., 1893, ii. 170, 171.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_173"><span class="label">[173]</span></a> {146}[See <i>The Prophecy of Dante,</i> Canto I. lines 172-174, <i>Poetical Works,</i> 1901, iv. 253, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_174"><span class="label">[174]</span></a> Milton's first wife ran away from him within the first month. If she had not, what would John Milton have done?</p>
					<p>[Mary Powell did not "run away," but at the end of the honeymoon obtained her husband's consent to visit her family at Shotover, "upon a promise of returning at Michaelmas." "And in the mean while his studies went on very vigorously; and his chief diversion, after the business of the day, was now and then in an evening to visit the Lady Margaret Lee.... This lady, being a woman of excellent wit and understanding, had a particular honour for our author, and took great delight in his conversation; as likewise did her husband, Captain Hobson." See, too, his sonnet "To the Lady Margaret Ley."—<i>The Life of Milton</i> (by Thomas Newton, D.D.), <i>Paradise Regained,</i> ed. (Baskerville), 1758, pp. xvii., xviii.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_175"><span class="label">[175]</span></a> ["Yesterday a very pretty letter from Annabella.... She is a poetess—a mathematician—a metaphysician."—<i>Journal</i> November 30, 1813, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 357.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CJ"><span class="label">[CJ]</span></a> {147}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Displayed much more of nerve, perhaps, of wit,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Than any of the parodies of Pitt</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CK"><span class="label">[CK]</span></a> {148} <i>—— toothpicks, a bidet</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
					<p>"<i>Dr. Murray—As you are squeamish you may put 'teapot, tray,' in case the other piece of feminine furniture frightens you.—B.</i>"</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_176"><span class="label">[176]</span></a> [For Byron's menagerie, see <i>Werner</i>, act i. sc. 1, line 216, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1902, v. 348, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_177"><span class="label">[177]</span></a> {149}["But as for canine recollections ... I had one (half a <i>wolf</i> by the she-side) that doted on me at ten years old, and very nearly ate me at twenty. When I thought he was going to enact Argus, he bit away the backside of my breeches, and never would consent to any kind of recognition, in despite of all kinds of bones which I offered him."—Letter to Moore, January 19, 1815, <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 171, 172. Compare, too, <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. Song, stanza ix., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 30.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CL"><span class="label">[CL]</span></a> {150}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Yet for all that don't stay away too long,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>A sofa, like a bed, may come by wrong</i>.—[MS.]</p>
							<p><i>I've known the friend betrayed</i>——.—[MS. D.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_178"><span class="label">[178]</span></a> {151}[The Pyrrhic war-dance represented "by rapid movements of the body, the way in which missiles and blows from weapons were avoided, and also the mode in which the enemy was attacked" (<i>Dict. of Ant.</i>). Dodwell (<i>Tour through Greece</i>, 1819, ii. 21, 22) observes that in Thessaly and Macedon dances are performed at the present day by men armed with their musket and sword. See, too, Hobhouse's description (<i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, i. 166, 167) of the Albanian war-dance at Loutráki.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_179"><span class="label">[179]</span></a> ["Their manner of dancing is certainly the same that Diana is <i>sung</i> to have danced on the banks of Eurotas. The great lady still leads the dance, and is followed by a troop of young girls, who imitate her steps, and, if she sings, make up the chorus. The tunes are extremely gay and lively, yet with something in them wonderfully soft. The steps are varied according to the pleasure of her that leads the dance, but always in exact time, and infinitely more agreeable than any of our dances."—Lady M.W. Montagu to Pope, April 1, O.S., 1817, <i>Letters, etc.</i>, 1816, p. 138. The "kerchief-waving" dance is the <i>Romaika</i>. See <i>The Waltz</i>, line 125, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 492, note 1. See, too, <i>Voyage Pittoresque</i> ... by the Comte de Choiseul-Gouffier, 1782, vol. i. Planche 33.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CM"><span class="label">[CM]</span></a> <i>That would have set Tom Moore, though married, raving.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_180"><span class="label">[180]</span></a> {152}["Upon the whole, I think the part of <i>Don Juan</i> in which Lambro's return to his home, and Lambro himself are described, is the best, that is, the most individual, thing in all I know of Lord B.'s works. The festal abandonment puts one in mind of Nicholas Poussin's pictures."—<i>Table Talk</i> of S.T. Coleridge, June 7, 1824.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_181"><span class="label">[181]</span></a> {153}[Compare <i>Hudibras</i>, Part I. canto iii. lines 1, 2—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Ay me! what perils do environ</p>
							<p>The man that meddles with cold iron!"</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Byron's friend, C.S. Matthews, shouted these lines, <i>con intenzione</i>, under the windows of a Cambridge tradesman named Hiron, who had been instrumental in the expulsion from the University of Sir Henry Smyth, a riotous undergraduate. (See letter to Murray, October 19, 1820.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CN"><span class="label">[CN]</span></a> {154}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>All had been open, heart, and open house,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Ever since Juan served her for a spouse.</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_182"><span class="label">[182]</span></a> {155}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Rispose allor Margutte: a dirtel tosto,</p>
							<p class="i4">Io non credo più al nero ch' all' azzurro;</p>
							<p>Ma nel cappone, o lesso, o vuogli arrosto,</p>
							<p>E credo alcuna volta anche nel burro;</p>
							<p>Nella cervogia, e quando io n' ho nel mosto,</p>
							<p>E molto più nell' aspro che il mangurro;</p>
							<p>Ma sopra tutto nel buon vino ho fede,</p>
							<p>E credo che sia salvo chi gli crede."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Pulci, <i>Morgante Maggiore</i>, Canto XVIII. stanza cxv.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CO"><span class="label">[CO]</span></a> {157}<i>For instance, if a first or second wife.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CP"><span class="label">[CP]</span></a> {159}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>And send him forth like Samson strong in blindness</i>.—[MS. D.]</p>
							<p><i>And make him Samson-like—more fierce with blindness</i>.—[MS. M.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CQ">
							<span class="label">[CQ]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Not so the single, deep, and wordless ire,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Of a strong human heart</i>—.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_183"><span class="label">[183]</span></a> {160}["Almost all <i>Don Juan</i> is <i>real</i> life, either my own, or from people I knew. By the way, much of the description of the <i>furniture</i>, in Canto Third, is taken from <i>Tully's Tripoli</i> (pray <i>note this</i>), and the rest from my own observation. Remember, I never meant to conceal this at all, and have only not stated it, because <i>Don Juan</i> had no preface, nor name to it."—Letter to Murray, August 23, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 346.</p>
					<p>The first edition of <i>"Tully's Tripoli"</i> is entitled <i>Narrative of a Ten Years' Residence in Tripoli In Africa: From the original correspondence in the possession of the Family of the late Richard Tully, Esq., the British Consul</i>, 1816, 410. The book is in the form of letters (so says the <i>Preface</i>) written by the Consul's sister. The description of Haidée's <i>dress</i> is taken from the account of a visit to Lilla Kebbiera, the wife of the Bashaw (p. 30); the description of the furniture and refreshments from the account of a visit to "Lilla Amnani," Hadgi Abderrahmam's Greek wife (pp. 132-137). It is evident that the "Chiel" who took <i>these</i> "notes" was the Consul's <i>sister</i>, not the Consul: "Lilla Aisha, the Bey's wife, is thought to be very sensible, though rather haughty. Her apartments were grand, and herself superbly habited. Her chemise was covered with gold embroidery at the neck; over it she wore a gold and silver tissue <i>jileck</i>, or jacket without sleeves, and over that another of purple velvet richly laced with gold, with coral and pearl buttons set quite close together down the front; it had short sleeves finished with a gold band not far below the shoulder, and discovered a wide loose chemise of transparent gauze, with gold, silver, and ribband strips. She wore round her ancles ... a sort of fetter made of a thick bar of gold so fine that they bound it round the leg with one hand; it is an inch and a half wide, and as much in thickness: each of these weighs four pounds. Just above this a band three inches wide of gold thread finished the ends of a pair of trousers made of pale yellow and white silk."</p>
					<p>Page 132. "[Lilla] rose to take coffee, which was served in very small china cups, placed in silver filigree cups; and gold filigree cups were put under those presented to the married ladies. They had introduced cloves, cinnamon, and saffron into the coffee, which was abundantly sweetened; but this mixture was very soon changed, and replaced by excellent simple coffee for the European ladies...."</p>
					<p>Page 133. "The Greek then shewed us the gala furniture of her own room.... The hangings of the room were of tapestry, made in pannels of different coloured velvets, thickly inlaid with flowers of silk damask; a yellow border, of about a foot in depth, finished the tapestry at top and bottom, the upper border being embroidered with Moorish sentences from the Koran in lilac letters. The carpet was of crimson satin, with a deep border of pale blue quilted; this is laid over Indian mats and other carpets. In the best part of the room the sofa is placed, which occupies three sides in an alcove, the floor of which is raised. The sofa and the cushions that lay around were of crimson velvet, the centre cushions were embroidered with a sun in gold of highly embossed work, the rest were of gold and silver tissue. The curtains of the alcove were made to match those before the bed. A number of looking-glasses, and a profusion of fine china and chrystal completed the ornaments and furniture of the room, in which were neither tables nor chairs. A small table, about six inches high, is brought in when refreshments are served; it is of ebony, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, tortoiseshell, ivory, gold and silver, of choice woods, or of plain mahogany, according to the circumstances of the proprietor."</p>
					<p>Page 136. "On the tables were placed all sorts of refreshments, and thirty or forty dishes of meat and poultry, dressed different ways; there were no knives nor forks, and only a few spoons of gold, silver, ivory, or coral...."</p>
					<p>Page 137. "The beverage was various sherbets, some composed of the juice of boiled raisins, very sweet; some of the juice of pomegranates squeezed through the rind; and others of the pure juice of oranges. These sherbets were copiously supplied in high glass ewers, placed in great numbers on the ground.... After the dishes of meat were removed, a dessert of Arabian fruits, confectionaries, and sweetmeats was served; among the latter was the date-bread. This sweetmeat is made in perfection only by the blacks at Fezzan, of the ripe date of the country.... They make it in the shape of loaves, weighing from twenty to thirty pounds; the stones of the fruit are taken out, and the dates simply pressed together with great weights; thus preserved, it keeps perfectly good for a year."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_184"><span class="label">[184]</span></a> {162}["He writes like a man who has that clear perception of the truth of things which is the result of the guilty knowledge of good and evil; and who, by the light of that knowledge, has deliberately preferred the evil with a proud malignity of purpose, which would seem to leave little for the last consummating change to accomplish. When he calculates that the reader is on the verge of pitying him, he takes care to throw him back the defiance of laughter, as if to let him know that all the Poet's pathos is but the sentimentalism of the drunkard between his cups, or the relenting softness of the courtesan, who the next moment resumes the bad boldness of her degraded character. With such a man, who would wish either to laugh or to weep?"—<i>Eclectic Review</i> (Lord Byron's <i>Mazeppa</i>), August, 1819, vol. xii. p. 150.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CR"><span class="label">[CR]</span></a> <i>For that's the name they like to cant beneath.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CS"><span class="label">[CS]</span></a> {163}<i>The upholsterer's</i> "fiat lux" <i>had bade to issue.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_185"><span class="label">[185]</span></a> {164}This dress is Moorish, and the bracelets and bar are worn in the manner described. The reader will perceive hereafter, that as the mother of Haidée was of Fez, her daughter wore the garb of the country. [<i>Vide ante</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#Footnote_183">p. 160, note 1</a>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_186"><span class="label">[186]</span></a> The bar of gold above the instep is a mark of sovereign rank in the women of the families of the Deys, and is worn as such by their female relatives. [<i>Vide ibid.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_187"><span class="label">[187]</span></a> This is no exaggeration: there were four women whom I remember to have seen, who possessed their hair in this profusion; of these, three were English, the other was a Levantine. Their hair was of that length and quantity, that, when let down, it almost entirely shaded the person, so as nearly to render dress a superfluity. Of these, only one had dark hair; the Oriental's had, perhaps, the lightest colour of the four.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_188"><span class="label">[188]</span></a> [Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Yet there was round thee such a dawn</p>
							<p class="i2">Of Light ne'er seen before,</p>
							<p>As Fancy never could have drawn,</p>
							<p class="i2">And never can restore."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Song by Rev. C. Wolfe (1791-1823).</p>
					<p>Compare, too—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"She was a form of Life and Light</p>
							<p>That, seen, became a part of sight."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>The Giaour</i>, lines 1127, 1128.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_189"><span class="label">[189]</span></a> {165}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>[" ... but Psyche owns no lord—</p>
							<p class="i2">She walks a goddess from above;</p>
							<p>All saw, all praised her, all adored,</p>
							<p class="i2">But no one ever dared to love."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>The Golden Ass of Apuleius; in English verse, entitled Cupid and Psyche</i>, by Hudson Gurney, 1799.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_190"><span class="label">[190]</span></a> [<i>King John</i>, act iv. sc. 2, line 11.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_191"><span class="label">[191]</span></a> {166} ["Richard Crashaw (died 1650), the friend of Cowley, was honoured," says Warton, "with the praise of Pope; who both read his poems and borrowed from them. After he was ejected from his Fellowship at Peterhouse for denying the covenant, he turned Roman Catholic, and died canon of the church at Loretto." Cowley sang his <i>In Memoriam</i>—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"<i>Angels</i> (they say) brought the famed <i>Chappel</i> there;</p>
							<p>And bore the sacred Load in Triumph through the air:—</p>
							<p>'T is surer much they brought thee there, and <i>They</i>,</p>
							<p>And <i>Thou</i>, their charge, went <i>singing</i> all the way."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>The Works, etc.</i>, 1668, pp. 29, 30.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CT"><span class="label">[CT]</span></a> <i>Believed like Southey—and perused like Crashaw.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_192"><span class="label">[192]</span></a> {167}[The second chapter of Coleridge's <i>Biographia Literaria</i> is on the "supposed irritability of men of genius." Ed. 1847, i. 29.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CU"><span class="label">[CU]</span></a> <i>Their poet a sad Southey</i>.—[MS. D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CV"><span class="label">[CV]</span></a> <i>Of rogues</i>—.—[MS. D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CW"><span class="label">[CW]</span></a> <i>Of which the causers never know the cause</i>.—[MS. D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_193"><span class="label">[193]</span></a> {168}[<i>Vide St. August. Epist.</i>, xxxvi., cap. xiv., "Ille [Ambrosius, Mediolanensis Episcopus] adjecit; Quando hic sum, non jejuno sabbato; quando Romae sum, jejuno sabbato."—Migne's <i>Patrologiæ Cursus</i>, 1845, xxxiii. 151.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CX"><span class="label">[CX]</span></a> <i>From the high lyrical to the low rational</i>.—[MS.D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_194"><span class="label">[194]</span></a> [The allusion is to Coleridge's eulogy of Southey in the Biographia Literaria (ed. 1847, i. 61): "In poetry he has attempted almost every species of composition known before, and he has added new ones; and if we except the very highest lyric ... he has attempted every species successfully." But the satire, primarily and ostensibly aimed at Southey, now and again glances at Southey's eulogist.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_195"><span class="label">[195]</span></a> ["Goethe pourroit représenter la littérature allemande toute entière."—<i>De L'Allemagne</i>, par Mme. la Baronne de Staël-Holstein, 1818, i. 227.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_196"><span class="label">[196]</span></a> [The poet is not "a sad Southey," but is sketched from memory. "Lord Byron," writes Finlay (<i>History of Greece</i>, vi. 335, note), "used to describe an evening passed in the company of Londos [a Morean landowner, who took part in the first and second Greek Civil Wars], at Vostitza (in 1809), when both were young men, with a spirit that rendered the scene worthy of a place in <i>Don Juan</i>. After supper Londos, who had the face and figure of a chimpanzee, sprang upon a table, ... and commenced singing through his nose Rhiga's Hymn to Liberty. A new cadi, passing near the house, inquired the cause of the discordant hubbub. A native Mussulman replied, 'It is only the young primate Londos, who is drunk, and is singing hymns to the new panaghia of the Greeks, whom they call Eleutheria.'" (See letter to Andreas Londos (undated), <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 320, note 1.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_197"><span class="label">[197]</span></a> {169}The <span title="Maka/rôn nê~soi">Μακάρων νῆσοι</span> [Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, line 169] of the Greek poets were supposed to have been the Cape de Verd Islands, or the Canaries.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CY">
							<span class="label">[CY]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Euboea looks on Marathon,</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>And Marathon looks on the sea, etc.</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_198"><span class="label">[198]</span></a> [See Æschylus, <i>Persæ</i>, 463, sq.; and Herodotus, viii. 90. Harpocration records the preservation, in the Acropolis, of the silver-footed throne on which Xerxes sat when he watched the battle of Salamis from the slope of Mount Ægaleos.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_CZ"><span class="label">[CZ]</span></a> {170}<i>The Heroic heart awakes no more</i>.—[MS. D.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_199"><span class="label">[199]</span></a> {171}[For "that most ancient military dance, the <i>Pyrrhica</i>," see <i>Travels</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1814, part ii. sect. 11, p. 641; and for specimens of "Cadmean characters," <i>vide ibid.</i>, p. 593.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_200"><span class="label">[200]</span></a> [After his birthplace Teos was taken by the Persians, B.C. 510, Anacreon migrated to Abdera, but afterwards lived at Samos, under the protection of Polycrates.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DA"><span class="label">[DA]</span></a> <i>Which Hercules might deem his own.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_201"><span class="label">[201]</span></a> {172}[See the translation of a speech delivered to the Pargiots, in 1815, by an aged citizen: "I exhort you well to consider, before you yield yourselves up to the English, that the King of England now has in his pay all the kings of Europe—obtaining money for this purpose from his merchants; whence, should it become advantageous to the merchants to sell you, in order to conciliate Ali, and obtain certain commercial advantages in his harbours, the <i>English will sell you to Ali.</i>" —"Parga," <i>Edinburgh Review</i>, October, 1819. vol. 32, pp. 263-293. Here, perhaps, the "Franks" are the Russians. Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i8">"Greeks only should free Greece,</p>
							<p>Not the barbarian with his masque of peace."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>The Age of Bronze</i>, lines 298, 299, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 557, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_202">
							<span class="label">[202]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>[<span title="Genoi/man, i(/n' y(la~en e)/pesti po/n-">Γενοίμαν, ἵν' ὑλᾶεν ἔπεστι πόν</span>-</p>
							<p><span title="tou pro/blêm' a(li/klyston, a)/">του πρόβλημ' ἁλίκλυστον, ἄ</span>-</p>
							<p><span title="kran y(po\ pla/ka Souni/ou, k.t.l.">κραν ὑπὸ πλάκα Σουνίου, κ.τ.λ</span>.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Sophocles, <i>Ajax</i>, lines 1190-1192.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_203"><span class="label">[203]</span></a> {173}[Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"What poets feel not, when they make,</p>
							<p class="i2">A pleasure in creating,</p>
							<p>The world, in <i>its</i> turn, will not take</p>
							<p class="i2">Pleasure in contemplating."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Matthew Arnold (Motto to <i>Poems</i>, 1869, vol. i. Fly-leaf).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_204"><span class="label">[204]</span></a> [For this "sentence," see <i>Journal</i>, November 16, 1813, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 320, note 1; see, too, letter to Rogers, 1814, <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 89, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DB"><span class="label">[DB]</span></a> <i>In digging drains for a new water-closet.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_205"><span class="label">[205]</span></a> [For Edmund Hoyle (1672-1769), see <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, lines 966-968, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 372, note 4.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_206"><span class="label">[206]</span></a> {174}[William Coxe (1747-1828), Archdeacon of Wilts, a voluminous historian and biographer, published <i>Memoirs of John, Duke of Marlborough</i>, in 1817-1819.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_207"><span class="label">[207]</span></a> [See <i>Life of Milton, Works</i> of Samuel Johnson, 1825, vii. pp. 67, 68, 80, <i>et vide ante</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#Footnote_174">p. 146, note 2</a>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_208"><span class="label">[208]</span></a> [According to Suetonius, the youthful Titus amused himself by copying handwriting, and boasted that he could have made a first-rate <i>falsarius</i>. One of Cæsar's "earliest acts" was to crucify some jovial pirates, who had kidnapped him, and with whom he pretended to be on pleasant if not friendly terms.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_209"><span class="label">[209]</span></a> [James Currie, M.D. (1756-1805), published, anonymously, the <i>Works of Robert Burns, with an account of his Life, etc.</i>, in 1800.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_210"><span class="label">[210]</span></a> ["He [Cromwell] was very notorious for robbing orchards, a puerile crime ... but grown so scandalous and injurious by the frequent spoyls and damages of Trees, breaking of Hedges, and Inclosures, committed by this <i>Apple-Dragon</i>, that many solemn complaints were made both to his Father and Mother for redresse thereof; which missed not their satisfaction and expiation out of his hide," etc.—<i>Flagellum</i>, by James Heath, 1663, p. 5. See, too, for his "name of a Royster" at Cambridge, <i>A Short View of the Late Troubles in England</i>, by Sir William Dugdale, 1681, p. 459.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_211"><span class="label">[211]</span></a> {175}[In <i>The Friend</i>, 1818, ii. 38, Coleridge refers to "a plan ... of trying the experiment of human perfectibility on the banks of the Susquehanna;" and Southey, in his <i>Letter to William Smith, Esq.</i> (1817), (<i>Essays Moral and Political</i>, by Robert Southey, 1832, ii. 17), speaks of his "purpose to retire with a few friends into the wilds of America, and there lay the foundations of a community," etc.; but the word "<i>Pantisocracy</i>" is not mentioned. It occurs, perhaps, for the first time in print, in George Dyer's biographical sketch of Southey, which he contributed to <i>Public Characters of 1799-1800</i>, p. 225, "Coleridge, no less than Southey, possessed a strong passion for poetry. They commenced, like two young poets, an enthusiastic friendship, and in connection with others, struck out a plan for settling in America, and for having all things in common. This scheme they called Pantisocracy." Hence, the phrase must have "caught on," for, in a footnote to his review of Coleridge's <i>Literary Life</i> (<i>Edin. Rev.</i>, August, 1817, vol. xxviii. p. 501), Jeffrey speaks of "the Pantisocratic or Lake School."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_212"><span class="label">[212]</span></a> [Wordsworth <i>was</i> "hired," but not, like Burns, "excised." Hazlitt (<i>Lectures on the English Poets</i>, 1870, p. 174) is responsible for the epithet: "Mr. Wordsworth might have shown the incompatibility between the Muse and the Excise," etc.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DC"><span class="label">[DC]</span></a> <i>Confined his pedlar poems to democracy.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_213"><span class="label">[213]</span></a> [Coleridge began his poetical contributions to the <i>Morning Post</i> in January, 1798; his poetical articles in 1800.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DD"><span class="label">[DD]</span></a> <i>Flourished its sophistry for aristocracy.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_214"><span class="label">[214]</span></a> [Coleridge was married to Sarah Fricker, October 5; Southey to her younger sister Edith, November 15, 1795. Their father, Stephen Fricker, who had been an innkeeper, and afterwards a potter at Bristol, migrated to Bath about the year 1780. For the last six years of his life he was owner and manager of a coal wharf. He had inherited a small fortune, and his wife brought him money, but he died bankrupt, and left his family destitute. His widow returned to Bristol, and kept a school. In a letter to Murray, dated September 11, 1822 (<i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 113), Byron quotes the authority of "Luttrell," and "his friend Mr. Nugent," for the statement that Mrs. Southey and "Coleridge's Sara ... before they were married ... were milliner's or dressmaker's apprentices." The story rests upon their evidence. It is certain that in 1794, when Coleridge appeared upon the scene, the sisters earned their living by going out to work in the houses of friends, and were not, at that time, "milliners of Bath."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_215"><span class="label">[215]</span></a> {176}[For Joanna Southcott (1750-1814), see <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 128-130, note 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_216"><span class="label">[216]</span></a> [Here follows, in the original MS.—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Time has approved Ennui to be the best</p>
							<p class="i2">Of friends, and opiate draughts; your love and wine,</p>
							<p>Which shake so much the human brain and breast,</p>
							<p class="i2">Must end in languor;—men must sleep like swine:</p>
							<p>The happy lover and the welcome guest</p>
							<p class="i2">Both sink at last into a swoon divine;</p>
							<p>Full of deep raptures and of bumpers, they</p>
							<p>Are somewhat sick and sorry the next day."]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_217"><span class="label">[217]</span></a> {177}["Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus."—Hor., <i>Epist. Ad Pisones</i>, line 359.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_218"><span class="label">[218]</span></a> [Wordsworth's <i>Benjamin the Waggoner</i>, was written in 1805, but was not published till 1819. "Benjamin" was servant to William Jackson, a Keswick carrier, who built Greta Hall, and let off part of the house to Coleridge.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_219">
							<span class="label">[219]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["There's something in a flying horse,</p>
							<p>There's something in a huge balloon;</p>
							<p>But through the clouds I'll never float</p>
							<p>Until I have a little Boat,</p>
							<p>Shaped like the crescent-moon."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Wordsworth's <i>Peter Bell</i>, stanza i.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_220"><span class="label">[220]</span></a> [For Medea's escape from the wrath of Jason, "Titaniacis ablata draconibus," see Ovid., <i>Met.</i>, vii. 398.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_221"><span class="label">[221]</span></a> [In his "Essay, Supplementary to the Preface," to his "Poems" of 1815, Wordsworth, commenting on a passage on Night in Dryden's <i>Indian Emperor</i>, says, "Dryden's lines are vague, bombastic, and senseless.... The verses of Dryden once celebrated are forgotten." He is not passing any general criticism on "him who drew <i>Achitophel</i>." In a letter to Sir Walter Scott (November 7, 1805), then engaged on his great edition of Dryden's <i>Works</i>, he admits that Dryden is not "as a poet any great favourite of mine. I admire his talents and genius highly, but he is not a poetical genius. The only qualities I can find in Dryden that are <i>essentially</i> poetical, are a certain ardour and impetuosity of mind, with an excellent ear" (<i>Life of Wordsworth</i>, by W. Knight, 1889, ii. 26-29). Scott may have remarked on Wordsworth's estimate of Dryden in conversation with Byron.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DE"><span class="label">[DE]</span></a> {178}<i>While swung the signal from the sacred tower.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DF"><span class="label">[DF]</span></a> {179}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Are not these pretty stanzas?—some folks say—</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Downright in print</i>—.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_222"><span class="label">[222]</span></a> [Compare Coleridge's <i>Lines to Nature</i>, which were published in the <i>Morning Herald</i>, in 1815, but must have been unknown to Byron—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"So will I build my altar in the fields,</p>
							<p>And the blue sky my fretted dome shall be."]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_223"><span class="label">[223]</span></a> ["As early as the fifth or sixth century of the Christian era, the port of Augustus was converted into pleasant orchards, and a lovely grove of pines covered the ground where the Roman fleet once rode at anchor.... This advantageous situation was fortified by art and <i>labour</i>, and in the twentieth year of his age, the Emperor of the West ... retired to ... the walls and morasses of Ravenna."—Gibbon's <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, ii. 244, 245.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_224"><span class="label">[224]</span></a> ["The first time I had a conversation with Lord Byron on the subject of religion was at Ravenna, my native country, in 1820, while we were riding on horseback in an extensive solitary wood of pines. The scene invited to religious meditation. It was a fine day in spring. 'How,' he said, 'raising our eyes to heaven, or directing them to the earth, can we doubt of the existence of God?—or how, turning them to what is within us, can we doubt that there is something more noble and durable than the clay of which we are formed?'"—Count Gamba.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_225"><span class="label">[225]</span></a> {180}[If the <i>Pineta</i> of Ravenna, <i>bois funèbre</i>, invited Byron "to religious meditation," the mental picture of the "spectre huntsman" pursuing his eternal vengeance on "the inexorable dame"—"that fatal she," who had mocked his woes—must have set in motion another train of thought. Such lines as these would "speak comfortably" to him—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Because she deem'd I well deserved to die,</p>
							<p>And <i>made a merit</i> of her cruelty, ...</p>
							<p>Mine is the ungrateful maid by heaven design'd:</p>
							<p>Mercy she would not give, nor mercy shall she find."</p>
							<p/>
							<p/>
							<p>"By her example warn'd, the rest beware;</p>
							<p>More easy, less imperious, were the fair;</p>
							<p>And that one hunting, which the Devil design'd</p>
							<p>For one fair female, lost him half the kind."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Dryden's <i>Theodore and Honoria</i> (<i>sub fine</i>).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_226">
							<span class="label">[226]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<span title="Espere panta phereis">Εσπερε παντα φερεις</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span title="Phereis oinon—phereis aiga,">Φερεις οινον—φερεις αιγα</span>
							</p>
							<p><span title="Phereis materi paida.">Φερεις ματερι παιδα</span>.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">
						<i>Fragment of Sappho.</i>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>[<span title="We/spere, pa/nta phe/rôn, o(/sa phai/nolis e)ske/das' au)/ôs">Ϝέσπερε, πάντα φέρων, ὅσα φαίνολις ἐσκέδασ' αὔως·</span></p>
							<p><span title="Phe/reis oi)/n phe/reis ai~)ga, Phe/reis a)/py mate/ri pai~da.">Φέρεις οἴν φέρεις αἶγα, Φέρεις ἄπυ ματέρι παῖδα</span>.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Sappho</i>, Memoir, Text, by Henry Thornton Wharton, 1895, p. 136.</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Evening, all things thou bringest</p>
							<p class="i2">Which dawn spread apart from each other;</p>
							<p>The lamb and the kid thou bringest,</p>
							<p class="i2">Thou bringest the boy to his mother."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">J.A. Symonds.</p>
					<p>Compare Tennyson's <i>Locksley Hall, Sixty Years After</i>—"Hesper, whom the poet call'd the Bringer home of all good things."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_227"><span class="label">[227]</span></a> {181}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Era già l'ora che volge il disio</p>
							<p class="i2">Ai naviganti, e intenerisce il cuore;</p>
							<p class="i2">Lo di ch' han detto ai dolci amici addio;</p>
							<p>E che lo nuovo peregrin' damore</p>
							<p class="i2">Punge, se ode squilla di lontano,</p>
							<p class="i2">Che paia il giorno pianger che si more."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Dante's <i>Purgatory</i>, canto viii., lines 1-6.</p>
					<p>This last line is the first of Gray's Elegy, taken by him without acknowledgment.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_228"><span class="label">[228]</span></a> See Suetonius for this fact.</p>
					<p>["The public joy was so great upon the occasion of his death, that the common people ran up and down with caps upon their heads. And yet there were some, who for a long time trimmed up his tomb with spring and summer flowers, and, one while, placed his image upon his rostra dressed up in state robes, another while published proclamations in his name, as if he was yet alive, and would shortly come to Rome again, with a vengeance to all his enemies."—<i>De XII. Cæs.</i>, lib. vi. cap. lvii.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DG">
							<span class="label">[DG]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>But I'm digressing—what on earth have Nero</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>And Wordsworth—both poetical buffoons, etc.</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_229"><span class="label">[229]</span></a> {182} [See <i>De Poeticâ</i>, cap. xxiv. See, too, the Preface to Dryden's "Dedication" of the <i>Æneis</i> (<i>Works</i> of John Dryden, 1821, xiv. 130-134). Dryden is said to have derived his knowledge of Aristotle from Dacier's translation, and it is probable that Byron derived his from Dryden. See letter to Hodgson (<i>Letters</i>, 1891, v. 284), in which he quotes Aristotle as quoted in Johnson's <i>Life of Dryden</i>.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
