<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto XVI<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_768">[768]</a></h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The antique Persians taught three useful things,</p>
					<p class="i2">To draw the bow, to ride, and speak the truth,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_769">[769]</a></p>
					<p>This was the mode of Cyrus, best of kings—</p>
					<p class="i2">A mode adopted since by modern youth.</p>
					<p>Bows have they, generally with two strings;</p>
					<p class="i2">Horses they ride without remorse or ruth;</p>
					<p>At speaking truth perhaps they are less clever,</p>
					<p>But draw the long bow better now than ever.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The cause of this effect, or this defect,—</p>
					<p class="i2">"For this effect defective comes by cause,"—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_770">[770]</a></p>
					<p>Is what I have not leisure to inspect;</p>
					<p class="i2">But this I must say in my own applause,</p>
					<p>Of all the Muses that I recollect,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whate'er may be her follies or her flaws</p>
					<p>In some things, mine's beyond all contradiction</p>
					<p>The most sincere that ever dealt in fiction.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And as she treats all things, and ne'er retreats</p>
					<p class="i2">From anything, this Epic will contain</p>
					<p>A wilderness of the most rare conceits,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which you might elsewhere hope to find in vain.</p>
					<p>'Tis true there be some bitters with the sweets,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet mixed so slightly, that you can't complain,</p>
					<p>But wonder they so few are, since my tale is</p>
					<p>"<i>De rebus cunctis et quibusdam aliis.</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_771">[771]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But of all truths which she has told, the most</p>
					<p class="i2">True is that which she is about to tell.</p>
					<p>I said it was a story of a ghost—</p>
					<p class="i2">What then? I only know it so befell.</p>
					<p>Have you explored the limits of the coast,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where all the dwellers of the earth must dwell?</p>
					<p>'Tis time to strike such puny doubters dumb as</p>
					<p>The sceptics who would not believe Columbus.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some people would impose now with authority,</p>
					<p class="i2">Turpin's or Monmouth Geoffry's Chronicle;</p>
					<p>Men whose historical superiority</p>
					<p class="i2">Is always greatest at a miracle.</p>
					<p>But Saint Augustine has the great priority,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who bids all men believe the impossible,</p>
					<p><i>Because 'tis so.</i> Who nibble, scribble, quibble, he</p>
					<p>Quiets at once with "<i>quia impossibile.</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_772">[772]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And therefore, mortals, cavil not at all;</p>
					<p class="i2">Believe:—if 'tis improbable, you <i>must</i>,</p>
					<p>And if it is impossible, you <i>shall</i>:</p>
					<p class="i2">'Tis always best to take things upon trust.</p>
					<p>I do not speak profanely to recall</p>
					<p class="i2">Those holier Mysteries which the wise and just</p>
					<p>Receive as Gospel, and which grow more rooted,</p>
					<p>As all truths must, the more they are disputed:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I merely mean to say what Johnson said,</p>
					<p class="i2">That in the course of some six thousand years,</p>
					<p>All nations have believed that from the dead</p>
					<p class="i2">A visitant at intervals appears:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_773">[773]</a></p>
					<p>And what is strangest upon this strange head,</p>
					<p class="i2">Is, that whatever bar the reason rears</p>
					<p>'Gainst such belief, there's something stronger still</p>
					<p>In its behalf—let those deny who will.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The dinner and the <i>soirée</i> too were done,</p>
					<p class="i2">The supper too discussed, the dames admired,</p>
					<p>The banqueteers had dropped off one by one—</p>
					<p class="i2">The song was silent, and the dance expired:</p>
					<p>The last thin petticoats were vanished, gone</p>
					<p class="i2">Like fleecy clouds into the sky retired,</p>
					<p>And nothing brighter gleamed through the saloon</p>
					<p>Than dying tapers—and the peeping moon.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The evaporation of a joyous day</p>
					<p class="i2">Is like the last glass of champagne, without</p>
					<p>The foam which made its virgin bumper gay;</p>
					<p class="i2">Or like a system coupled with a doubt;</p>
					<p>Or like a soda bottle when its spray</p>
					<p class="i2">Has sparkled and let half its spirit out;</p>
					<p>Or like a billow left by storms behind,</p>
					<p>Without the animation of the wind;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Or like an opiate, which brings troubled rest,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or none; or like—like nothing that I know</p>
					<p>Except itself;—such is the human breast;</p>
					<p class="i2">A thing, of which similitudes can show</p>
					<p>No real likeness,—like the old Tyrian vest</p>
					<p class="i2">Dyed purple, none at present can tell how,</p>
					<p>If from a shell-fish or from cochineal.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_774">[774]</a></p>
					<p>So perish every Tyrant's robe piece-meal!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But next to dressing for a rout or ball,</p>
					<p class="i2">Undressing is a woe; our <i>robe de chambre</i></p>
					<p>May sit like that of Nessus,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_775">[775]</a> and recall</p>
					<p class="i2">Thoughts quite as yellow, but less clear than amber.</p>
					<p>Titus exclaimed, "I've lost a day!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_776">[776]</a> Of all</p>
					<p class="i2">The nights and days most people can remember,</p>
					<p>(I have had of both, some not to be disdained,)</p>
					<p>I wish they'd state how many they have gained.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Juan, on retiring for the night,</p>
					<p class="i2">Felt restless, and perplexed, and compromised:</p>
					<p>He thought Aurora Raby's eyes more bright</p>
					<p class="i2">Than Adeline (such is advice) advised;</p>
					<p>If he had known exactly his own plight,</p>
					<p class="i2">He probably would have philosophised:</p>
					<p>A great resource to all, and ne'er denied</p>
					<p>Till wanted; therefore Juan only sighed.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He sighed;—the next resource is the full moon,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where all sighs are deposited; and now</p>
					<p>It happened luckily, the chaste orb shone</p>
					<p class="i2">As clear as such a climate will allow;</p>
					<p>And Juan's mind was in the proper tone</p>
					<p class="i2">To hail her with the apostrophe—"O thou!"</p>
					<p>Of amatory egotism the <i>Tuism</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_777">[777]</a></p>
					<p>Which further to explain would be a truism.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Lover, Poet, or Astronomer—</p>
					<p class="i2">Shepherd, or swain—whoever may behold,</p>
					<p>Feel some abstraction when they gaze on her;</p>
					<p class="i2">Great thoughts we catch from thence (besides a cold</p>
					<p>Sometimes, unless my feelings rather err);</p>
					<p class="i2">Deep secrets to her rolling light are told;</p>
					<p>The Ocean's tides and mortals' brains she sways,</p>
					<p>And also hearts—if there be truth in lays.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan felt somewhat pensive, and disposed</p>
					<p class="i2">For contemplation rather than his pillow:</p>
					<p>The Gothic chamber, where he was enclosed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Let in the rippling sound of the lake's billow,</p>
					<p>With all the mystery by midnight caused:</p>
					<p class="i2">Below his window waved (of course) willow;</p>
					<p>And he stood gazing out on the cascade</p>
					<p>That flashed and after darkened in the shade.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Upon his table or his toilet,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_778">[778]</a>—<i>which</i></p>
					<p class="i2">Of these is not exactly ascertained,—</p>
					<p>(I state this, for I am cautious to a pitch</p>
					<p class="i2">Of nicety, where a fact is to be gained,)</p>
					<p>A lamp burned high, while he leant from a niche,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where many a Gothic ornament remained,</p>
					<p>In chiselled stone and painted glass, and all</p>
					<p>That Time has left our fathers of their Hall.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then, as the night was clear though cold, he threw</p>
					<p class="i2">His chamber door wide open<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_779">[779]</a>—and went forth</p>
					<p>Into a gallery of a sombre hue,</p>
					<p class="i2">Long, furnished with old pictures of great worth,</p>
					<p>Of knights and dames heroic and chaste too,</p>
					<p class="i2">As doubtless should be people of high birth;</p>
					<p>But by dim lights the portraits of the dead</p>
					<p>Have something ghastly, desolate, and dread.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The forms of the grim Knight and pictured Saint</p>
					<p class="i2">Look living in the moon; and as you turn</p>
					<p>Backward and forward to the echoes faint</p>
					<p class="i2">Of your own footsteps—voices from the Urn</p>
					<p>Appear to wake, and shadows wild and quaint</p>
					<p class="i2">Start from the frames which fence their aspects stern,</p>
					<p>As if to ask how you can dare to keep</p>
					<p>A vigil there, where all but Death should sleep.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And the pale smile of Beauties in the grave,</p>
					<p class="i2">The charms of other days, in starlight gleams,</p>
					<p>Glimmer on high; their buried locks still wave</p>
					<p class="i2">Along the canvas; their eyes glance like dreams</p>
					<p>On ours, or spars within some dusky cave,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_780">[780]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But Death is imaged in their shadowy beams.</p>
					<p>A picture is the past; even ere its frame</p>
					<p>Be gilt, who sate hath ceased to be the same.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>As Juan mused on Mutability,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or on his Mistress—terms synonymous—</p>
					<p>No sound except the echo of his sigh</p>
					<p class="i2">Or step ran sadly through that antique house;</p>
					<p>When suddenly he heard, or thought so, nigh,</p>
					<p class="i2">A supernatural agent—or a mouse,</p>
					<p>Whose little nibbling rustle will embarrass</p>
					<p>Most people as it plays along the arras.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It was no mouse—but lo! a monk, arrayed<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_781">[781]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">In cowl and beads, and dusky garb, appeared,</p>
					<p>Now in the moonlight, and now lapsed in shade,</p>
					<p class="i2">With steps that trod as heavy, yet unheard;</p>
					<p>His garments only a slight murmur made;</p>
					<p class="i2">He moved as shadowy as the Sisters weird,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_782">[782]</a></p>
					<p>But slowly; and as he passed Juan by,</p>
					<p>Glanced, without pausing, on him a bright eye.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan was petrified; he had heard a hint</p>
					<p class="i2">Of such a Spirit in these halls of old,</p>
					<p>But thought, like most men, that there was nothing in't</p>
					<p class="i2">Beyond the rumour which such spots unfold,</p>
					<p>Coined from surviving Superstition's mint,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which passes ghosts in currency like gold,</p>
					<p>But rarely seen, like gold compared with paper.</p>
					<p>And did he see this? or was it a vapour?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Once, twice, thrice passed, repassed—the thing of air,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or earth beneath, or Heaven, or t' other place;</p>
					<p>And Juan gazed upon it with a stare,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet could not speak or move; but, on its base</p>
					<p>As stands a statue, stood: he felt his hair</p>
					<p class="i2">Twine like a knot of snakes around his face;</p>
					<p>He taxed his tongue for words, which were not granted,</p>
					<p>To ask the reverend person what he wanted.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The third time, after a still longer pause,</p>
					<p class="i2">The shadow passed away—but where? the hall</p>
					<p>Was long, and thus far there was no great cause</p>
					<p class="i2">To think his vanishing unnatural:</p>
					<p>Doors there were many, through which, by the laws</p>
					<p class="i2">Of physics, bodies whether short or tall</p>
					<p>Might come or go; but Juan could not state</p>
					<p>Through which the Spectre seemed to evaporate.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He stood—how long he knew not, but it seemed</p>
					<p class="i2">An age—expectant, powerless, with his eyes</p>
					<p>Strained on the spot where first the figure gleamed</p>
					<p class="i2">Then by degrees recalled his energies,</p>
					<p>And would have passed the whole off as a dream,</p>
					<p class="i2">But could not wake; he was, he did surmise,</p>
					<p>Waking already, and returned at length</p>
					<p>Back to his chamber, shorn of half his strength.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All there was as he left it: still his taper</p>
					<p class="i2">Burned, and not <i>blue</i>, as modest tapers use,</p>
					<p>Receiving sprites with sympathetic vapour;</p>
					<p class="i2">He rubbed his eyes, and they did not refuse</p>
					<p>Their office: he took up an old newspaper;</p>
					<p class="i2">The paper was right easy to peruse;</p>
					<p>He read an article the King attacking,</p>
					<p>And a long eulogy of "Patent Blacking."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This savoured of this world; but his hand shook:</p>
					<p class="i2">He shut his door, and after having read</p>
					<p>A paragraph, I think about Horne Tooke,</p>
					<p class="i2">Undressed, and rather slowly went to bed.</p>
					<p>There, couched all snugly on his pillow's nook,</p>
					<p class="i2">With what he had seen his phantasy he fed;</p>
					<p>And though it was no opiate, slumber crept</p>
					<p>Upon him by degrees, and so he slept.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He woke betimes; and, as may be supposed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pondered upon his visitant or vision,</p>
					<p>And whether it ought not to be disclosed,</p>
					<p class="i2">At risk of being quizzed for superstition.</p>
					<p>The more he thought, the more his mind was posed:</p>
					<p class="i2">In the mean time, his valet, whose precision</p>
					<p>Was great, because his master brooked no less,</p>
					<p>Knocked to inform him it was time to dress.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He dressed; and like young people he was wont</p>
					<p class="i2">To take some trouble with his toilet, but</p>
					<p>This morning rather spent less time upon't;</p>
					<p class="i2">Aside his very mirror soon was put;</p>
					<p>His curls fell negligently o'er his front,</p>
					<p class="i2">His clothes were not curbed to their usual cut,</p>
					<p>His very neckcloth's Gordian knot was tied</p>
					<p>Almost an hair's breadth too much on one side.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And when he walked down into the Saloon,</p>
					<p class="i2">He sate him pensive o'er a dish of tea,</p>
					<p>Which he perhaps had not discovered soon,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had it not happened scalding hot to be,</p>
					<p>Which made him have recourse unto his spoon;</p>
					<p class="i2">So much <i>distrait</i> he was, that all could see</p>
					<p>That something was the matter—Adeline</p>
					<p>The first—but <i>what</i> she could not well divine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She looked, and saw him pale, and turned as pale</p>
					<p class="i2">Herself; then hastily looked down, and muttered</p>
					<p>Something, but what's not stated in my tale.</p>
					<p class="i2">Lord Henry said, his muffin was ill buttered;</p>
					<p>The Duchess of Fitz-Fulke played with her veil,</p>
					<p class="i2">And looked at Juan hard, but nothing uttered.</p>
					<p>Aurora Raby with her large dark eyes</p>
					<p>Surveyed him with a kind of calm surprise.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But seeing him all cold and silent still,</p>
					<p class="i2">And everybody wondering more or less,</p>
					<p>Fair Adeline inquired, "If he were ill?"</p>
					<p class="i2">He started, and said, "Yes—no—rather—yes."</p>
					<p>The family physician had great skill,</p>
					<p class="i2">And being present, now began to express</p>
					<p>His readiness to feel his pulse and tell</p>
					<p>The cause, but Juan said, he was "quite well."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Quite well; yes,—no."—These answers were mysterious,</p>
					<p class="i2">And yet his looks appeared to sanction both,</p>
					<p>However they might savour of delirious;</p>
					<p class="i2">Something like illness of a sudden growth</p>
					<p>Weighed on his spirit, though by no means serious:</p>
					<p class="i2">But for the rest, as he himself seemed both</p>
					<p>To state the case, it might be ta'en for granted</p>
					<p>It was not the physician that he wanted.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lord Henry, who had now discussed his chocolate,</p>
					<p class="i2">Also the muffin whereof he complained,</p>
					<p>Said, Juan had not got his usual look elate,</p>
					<p class="i2">At which he marvelled, since it had not rained;</p>
					<p>Then asked her Grace what news were of the Duke of late?</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>Her</i> Grace replied, <i>his</i> Grace was rather pained</p>
					<p>With some slight, light, hereditary twinges</p>
					<p>Of gout, which rusts aristocratic hinges.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then Henry turned to Juan, and addressed</p>
					<p class="i2">A few words of condolence on his state:</p>
					<p>"You look," quoth he, "as if you had had your rest</p>
					<p class="i2">Broke in upon by the Black Friar of late."</p>
					<p>"What Friar?" said Juan; and he did his best</p>
					<p class="i2">To put the question with an air sedate,</p>
					<p>Or careless; but the effort was not valid</p>
					<p>To hinder him from growing still more pallid.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Oh! have you never heard of the Black Friar?</p>
					<p class="i2">The Spirit of these walls?"—"In truth not I."</p>
					<p>"Why Fame—but Fame you know's sometimes a liar—</p>
					<p class="i2">Tells an odd story, of which by and by:</p>
					<p>Whether with time the Spectre has grown shyer,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or that our Sires had a more gifted eye</p>
					<p>For such sights, though the tale is half believed,</p>
					<p>The Friar of late has not been oft perceived.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"The last time was——"—"I pray," said Adeline—</p>
					<p class="i2">(Who watched the changes of Don Juan's brow,</p>
					<p>And from its context thought she could divine</p>
					<p class="i2">Connections stronger than he chose to avow</p>
					<p>With this same legend)—"if you but design</p>
					<p class="i2">To jest, you'll choose some other theme just now,</p>
					<p>Because the present tale has oft been told,</p>
					<p>And is not much improved by growing old."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Jest!" quoth Milor; "why, Adeline, you know</p>
					<p class="i2">That we ourselves—'twas in the honey moon</p>
					<p>Saw——"—"Well, no matter, 'twas so long ago;</p>
					<p class="i2">But, come, I'll set your story to a tune."</p>
					<p>Graceful as Dian when she draws her bow,</p>
					<p class="i2">She seized her harp, whose strings were kindled soon</p>
					<p>As touched, and plaintively began to play</p>
					<p>The air of "'Twas a Friar of Orders Gray."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_NZ">[NZ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"But add the words," cried Henry, "which you made;</p>
					<p class="i2">For Adeline is half a poetess,"</p>
					<p>Turning round to the rest, he smiling said.</p>
					<p class="i2">Of course the others could not but express</p>
					<p>In courtesy their wish to see displayed</p>
					<p class="i2">By one <i>three</i> talents, for there were no less—</p>
					<p>The voice, the words, the harper's skill, at once,</p>
					<p>Could hardly be united by a dunce.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>After some fascinating hesitation,—</p>
					<p class="i2">The charming of these charmers, who seem bound,</p>
					<p>I can't tell why, to this dissimulation,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Fair Adeline, with eyes fixed on the ground</p>
					<p>At first, then kindling into animation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Added her sweet voice to the lyric sound,</p>
					<p>And sang with much simplicity,—a merit</p>
					<p>Not the less precious, that we seldom hear it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>1.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Beware! beware! of the Black Friar,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who sitteth by Norman stone,</p>
					<p>For he mutters his prayer in the midnight air,</p>
					<p class="i2">And his mass of the days that are gone.</p>
					<p>When the Lord of the Hill, Amundeville,</p>
					<p class="i2">Made Norman Church his prey,</p>
					<p>And expelled the friars, one friar still</p>
					<p>Would not be driven away.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>2.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Though he came in his might, with King Henry's right,</p>
					<p class="i2">To turn church lands to lay,</p>
					<p>With sword in hand, and torch to light</p>
					<p class="i2">Their walls, if they said nay;</p>
					<p>A monk remained, unchased, unchained,</p>
					<p class="i2">And he did not seem formed of clay,</p>
					<p>For he's seen in the porch, and he's seen in the church,</p>
					<p>Though he is not seen by day.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>3.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And whether for good, or whether for ill,</p>
					<p class="i2">It is not mine to say;</p>
					<p>But still with the house of Amundeville</p>
					<p class="i2">He abideth night and day.</p>
					<p>By the marriage-bed of their lords, 'tis said,</p>
					<p class="i2">He flits on the bridal eve;</p>
					<p>And 'tis held as faith, to their bed of Death<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OA">[OA]</a></p>
					<p>He comes—but not to grieve.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>4.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When an heir is born, he's heard to mourn,</p>
					<p class="i2">And when aught is to befall</p>
					<p>That ancient line, in the pale moonshine</p>
					<p class="i2">He walks from hall to hall.</p>
					<p>His form you may trace, but not his face,</p>
					<p class="i2">'Tis shadowed by his cowl;</p>
					<p>But his eyes may be seen from the folds between,</p>
					<p>And they seem of a parted soul.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>5.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But beware! beware! of the Black Friar,</p>
					<p class="i2">He still retains his sway,</p>
					<p>For he is yet the Church's heir,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whoever may be the lay.</p>
					<p>Amundeville is Lord by day,</p>
					<p class="i2">But the monk is Lord by night;</p>
					<p>Nor wine nor wassail could raise a vassal</p>
					<p>To question that Friar's right.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>6.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Say nought to him as he walks the Hall,</p>
					<p class="i2">And he'll say nought to you;</p>
					<p>He sweeps along in his dusky pall,</p>
					<p class="i2">As o'er the grass the dew.</p>
					<p>Then grammercy! for the Black Friar;</p>
					<p class="i2">Heaven sain him! fair or foul,—</p>
					<p>And whatsoe'er may be his prayer,</p>
					<p>Let ours be for his soul.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The lady's voice ceased, and the thrilling wires</p>
					<p class="i2">Died from the touch that kindled them to sound;</p>
					<p>And the pause followed, which when song expires</p>
					<p class="i2">Pervades a moment those who listen round;</p>
					<p>And then of course the circle much admires,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor less applauds, as in politeness bound,</p>
					<p>The tones, the feeling, and the execution,</p>
					<p>To the performer's diffident confusion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fair Adeline, though in a careless way,</p>
					<p class="i2">As if she rated such accomplishment</p>
					<p>As the mere pastime of an idle day,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pursued an instant for her own content,</p>
					<p>Would now and then as 'twere <i>without</i> display,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet <i>with</i> display in fact, at times relent</p>
					<p>To such performances with haughty smile,</p>
					<p>To show she <i>could</i>, if it were worth her while.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now this (but we will whisper it aside)</p>
					<p class="i2">Was—pardon the pedantic illustration—</p>
					<p>Trampling on Plato's pride with greater pride,</p>
					<p class="i2">As did the Cynic on some like occasion;</p>
					<p>Deeming the sage would be much mortified,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or thrown into a philosophic passion,</p>
					<p>For a spoilt carpet—but the "Attic Bee"</p>
					<p>Was much consoled by his own repartee.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_783">[783]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus Adeline would throw into the shade</p>
					<p class="i2">(By doing easily, whene'er she chose,</p>
					<p>What dilettanti do with vast parade)</p>
					<p class="i2">Their sort of <i>half profession</i>; for it grows</p>
					<p>To something like this when too oft displayed;</p>
					<p class="i2">And that it is so, everybody knows,</p>
					<p>Who have heard Miss That or This, or Lady T'other,</p>
					<p>Show off—to please their company or mother.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! the long evenings of duets and trios!</p>
					<p class="i2">The admirations and the speculations;</p>
					<p>The "Mamma Mia's!" and the "Amor Mio's!"</p>
					<p class="i2">The "Tanti palpiti's" on such occasions:</p>
					<p>The "Lasciami's," and quavering "Addio's,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Amongst our own most musical of nations!</p>
					<p>With "Tu mi chamas's" from Portingale,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_784">[784]</a></p>
					<p>To soothe our ears, lest Italy should fail.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_785">[785]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In Babylon's <i>bravuras</i>—as the Home-</p>
					<p class="i2">Heart-Ballads of Green Erin or Grey Highlands,</p>
					<p>That bring Lochaber back to eyes that roam</p>
					<p class="i2">O'er far Atlantic continents or islands,</p>
					<p>The calentures<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_786">[786]</a> of music which o'ercome</p>
					<p class="i2">All mountaineers with dreams that they are nigh lands,</p>
					<p>No more to be beheld but in such visions—</p>
					<p>Was Adeline well versed, as compositions.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She also had a twilight tinge of "<i>Blue</i>,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Could write rhymes, and compose more than she wrote,</p>
					<p>Made epigrams occasionally too</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon her friends, as everybody ought.</p>
					<p>But still from that sublimer azure hue,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_787">[787]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">So much the present dye, she was remote;</p>
					<p>Was weak enough to deem Pope a great poet,</p>
					<p>And what was worse, was not ashamed to show it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Aurora—since we are touching upon taste,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which now-a-days is the thermometer</p>
					<p>By whose degrees all characters are classed—</p>
					<p class="i2">Was more Shakespearian, if I do not err.</p>
					<p>The worlds beyond this World's perplexing waste</p>
					<p class="i2">Had more of her existence, for in her</p>
					<p>There was a depth of feeling to embrace</p>
					<p>Thoughts, boundless, deep, but silent too as Space.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Not so her gracious, graceful, graceless Grace,</p>
					<p class="i2">The full-grown Hebe of Fitz-Fulke, whose mind,</p>
					<p>If she had any, was upon her face,</p>
					<p class="i2">And that was of a fascinating kind.</p>
					<p>A little turn for mischief you might trace</p>
					<p class="i2">Also thereon,—but that's not much; we find</p>
					<p>Few females without some such gentle leaven,</p>
					<p>For fear we should suppose us quite in Heaven.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I have not heard she was at all poetic,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though once she was seen reading the <i>Bath Guide</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_788">[788]</a></p>
					<p>And Hayley's <i>Triumphs</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_789">[789]</a> which she deemed pathetic,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because she said <i>her temper</i> had been tried</p>
					<p>So much, the bard had really been prophetic</p>
					<p class="i2">Of what she had gone through with—since a bride.</p>
					<p>But of all verse, what most ensured her praise</p>
					<p>Were sonnets to herself, or <i>bouts rimés</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'Twere difficult to say what was the object</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Adeline, in bringing this same lay</p>
					<p>To bear on what appeared to her the subject</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Juan's nervous feelings on that day.</p>
					<p>Perhaps she merely had the simple project</p>
					<p class="i2">To laugh him out of his supposed dismay;</p>
					<p>Perhaps she might wish to confirm him in it,</p>
					<p>Though why I cannot say—at least this minute.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But so far the immediate effect</p>
					<p class="i2">Was to restore him to his self-propriety,</p>
					<p>A thing quite necessary to the elect,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who wish to take the tone of their society:</p>
					<p>In which you cannot be too circumspect,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whether the mode be persiflage or piety,</p>
					<p>But wear the newest mantle of hypocrisy,</p>
					<p>On pain of much displeasing the gynocracy.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_790">[790]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And therefore Juan now began to rally</p>
					<p class="i2">His spirits, and without more explanation</p>
					<p>To jest upon such themes in many a sally.</p>
					<p class="i2">Her Grace, too, also seized the same occasion,</p>
					<p>With various similar remarks to tally,</p>
					<p class="i2">But wished for a still more detailed narration</p>
					<p>Of this same mystic friar's curious doings,</p>
					<p>About the present family's deaths and wooings.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of these few could say more than has been said;</p>
					<p class="i2">They passed as such things do, for superstition</p>
					<p>With some, while others, who had more in dread</p>
					<p class="i2">The theme, half credited the strange tradition;</p>
					<p>And much was talked on all sides on that head:</p>
					<p class="i2">But Juan, when cross-questioned on the vision,</p>
					<p>Which some supposed (though he had not avowed it)</p>
					<p>Had stirred him, answered in a way to cloud it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then, the mid-day having worn to one,</p>
					<p class="i2">The company prepared to separate;</p>
					<p>Some to their several pastimes, or to none,</p>
					<p class="i2">Some wondering 'twas so early, some so late.</p>
					<p>There was a goodly match too, to be run</p>
					<p class="i2">Between some greyhounds on my Lord's estate,</p>
					<p>And a young race-horse of old pedigree,</p>
					<p>Matched for the spring, whom several went to see.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was a picture-dealer who had brought</p>
					<p class="i2">A special Titian, warranted original,</p>
					<p>So precious that it was not to be bought,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though Princes the possessor were besieging all—</p>
					<p>The King himself had cheapened it, but thought</p>
					<p class="i2">The civil list he deigns to accept (obliging all</p>
					<p>His subjects by his gracious acceptation)—</p>
					<p>Too scanty, in these times of low taxation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But as Lord Henry was a connoisseur,—</p>
					<p class="i2">The friend of Artists, if not Arts,—the owner,</p>
					<p>With motives the most classical and pure,</p>
					<p class="i2">So that he would have been the very donor,</p>
					<p>Rather than seller, had his wants been fewer,</p>
					<p class="i2">So much he deemed his patronage an honour,</p>
					<p>Had brought the <i>capo d'opera</i>, not for sale,</p>
					<p>But for his judgment—never known to fail.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was a modern Goth, I mean a Gothic</p>
					<p class="i2">Bricklayer of Babel, called an architect,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OB">[OB]</a></p>
					<p>Brought to survey these grey walls which, though so thick,</p>
					<p class="i2">Might have from Time acquired some slight defect;</p>
					<p>Who, after rummaging the Abbey through thick</p>
					<p class="i2">And thin, produced a plan whereby to erect</p>
					<p>New buildings of correctest conformation,</p>
					<p>And throw down old—which he called <i>restoration</i>.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_791">[791]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The cost would be a trifle—an "old song,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Set to some thousands ('tis the usual burden</p>
					<p>Of that same tune, when people hum it long)—</p>
					<p class="i2">The price would speedily repay its worth in</p>
					<p>An edifice no less sublime than strong,</p>
					<p class="i2">By which Lord Henry's good taste would go forth in</p>
					<p>Its glory, through all ages shining sunny,</p>
					<p>For Gothic daring shown in English money.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_792">[792]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were two lawyers busy on a mortgage</p>
					<p class="i2">Lord Henry wished to raise for a new purchase;</p>
					<p>Also a lawsuit upon tenures burgage,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_793">[793]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And one on tithes, which sure as Discord's torches,</p>
					<p>Kindling Religion till she throws down <i>her</i> gage,</p>
					<p class="i2">"Untying" squires "to fight against the churches;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_794">[794]</a></p>
					<p>There was a prize ox, a prize pig, and ploughman,</p>
					<p>For Henry was a sort of Sabine showman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were two poachers caught in a steel trap,</p>
					<p class="i2">Ready for gaol, their place of convalescence;</p>
					<p>There was a country girl in a close cap</p>
					<p class="i2">And scarlet cloak (I hate the sight to see, since—</p>
					<p>Since—since—in youth, I had the sad mishap—</p>
					<p class="i2">But luckily I have paid few parish fees since):<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_795">[795]</a></p>
					<p>That scarlet cloak, alas! unclosed with rigour,</p>
					<p>Presents the problem of a double figure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A reel within a bottle is a mystery,</p>
					<p class="i2">One can't tell how it e'er got in or out;</p>
					<p>Therefore the present piece of natural history</p>
					<p class="i2">I leave to those who are fond of solving doubt;</p>
					<p>And merely state, though not for the Consistory,</p>
					<p class="i2">Lord Henry was a Justice, and that Scout</p>
					<p>The constable, beneath a warrant's banner,</p>
					<p>Had bagged this poacher upon Nature's manor.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now Justices of Peace must judge all pieces</p>
					<p class="i2">Of mischief of all kinds, and keep the game</p>
					<p>And morals of the country from caprices</p>
					<p class="i2">Of those who have not a licence for the same;</p>
					<p>And of all things, excepting tithes and leases,</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps these are most difficult to tame:</p>
					<p>Preserving partridges and pretty wenches</p>
					<p>Are puzzles to the most precautious benches.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The present culprit was extremely pale,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pale as if painted so; her cheek being red</p>
					<p>By nature, as in higher dames less hale</p>
					<p class="i2">'Tis white, at least when they just rise from bed.</p>
					<p>Perhaps she was ashamed of seeming frail,</p>
					<p class="i2">Poor soul! for she was country born and bred,</p>
					<p>And knew no better in her immorality</p>
					<p>Than to wax white—for blushes are for quality.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her black, bright, downcast, yet <i>espiègle</i> eye,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had gathered a large tear into its corner,</p>
					<p>Which the poor thing at times essayed to dry,</p>
					<p class="i2">For she was not a sentimental mourner</p>
					<p>Parading all her sensibility,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor insolent enough to scorn the scorner,</p>
					<p>But stood in trembling, patient tribulation,</p>
					<p>To be called up for her examination.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of course these groups were scattered here and there,</p>
					<p class="i2">Not nigh the gay saloon of ladies gent.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_796">[796]</a></p>
					<p>The lawyers in the study; and in air</p>
					<p class="i2">The prize pig, ploughman, poachers: the men sent</p>
					<p>From town, viz. architect and dealer, were</p>
					<p class="i2">Both busy (as a General in his tent</p>
					<p>Writing despatches) in their several stations,</p>
					<p>Exulting in their brilliant lucubrations.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But this poor girl was left in the great hall,</p>
					<p class="i2">While Scout, the parish guardian of the frail,</p>
					<p>Discussed (he hated beer yclept the "small")</p>
					<p class="i2">A mighty mug of <i>moral</i> double ale.</p>
					<p>She waited until Justice could recall</p>
					<p class="i2">Its kind attentions to their proper pale,</p>
					<p>To name a thing in nomenclature rather<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OC">[OC]</a></p>
					<p>Perplexing for most virgins—a child's father.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You see here was enough of occupation</p>
					<p class="i2">For the Lord Henry, linked with dogs and horses.</p>
					<p>There was much bustle too, and preparation</p>
					<p class="i2">Below stairs on the score of second courses;</p>
					<p>Because, as suits their rank and situation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Those who in counties have great land resources</p>
					<p>Have "public days," when all men may carouse,</p>
					<p>Though not exactly what's called "open house."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But once a week or fortnight, <i>un</i>invited</p>
					<p class="i2">(Thus we translate a <i>general invitation</i>)</p>
					<p>All country gentlemen, esquired or knighted,</p>
					<p class="i2">May drop in without cards, and take their station</p>
					<p>At the full board, and sit alike delighted</p>
					<p class="i2">With fashionable wines and conversation;</p>
					<p>And, as the isthmus of the grand connection,</p>
					<p>Talk o'er themselves the past and next election.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lord Henry was a great electioneerer,</p>
					<p class="i2">Burrowing for boroughs like a rat or rabbit.</p>
					<p>But county contests cost him rather dearer,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because the neighbouring Scotch Earl of Giftgabbit</p>
					<p>Had English influence, in the self-same sphere here;</p>
					<p class="i2">His son, the Honourable Dick Dicedrabbit,</p>
					<p>Was member for the "other interest" (meaning</p>
					<p>The same self-interest, with a different leaning).</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Courteous and cautious therefore in his county,</p>
					<p class="i2">He was all things to all men, and dispensed</p>
					<p>To some civility, to others bounty,</p>
					<p class="i2">And promises to all—which last commenced</p>
					<p>To gather to a somewhat large amount, he</p>
					<p class="i2">Not calculating how much they condensed;</p>
					<p>But what with keeping some, and breaking others,</p>
					<p>His word had the same value as another's.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A friend to Freedom and freeholders—yet</p>
					<p class="i2">No less a friend to Government—he held,</p>
					<p>That he exactly the just medium hit</p>
					<p class="i2">Twixt Place and Patriotism—albeit compelled,</p>
					<p>Such was his Sovereign's pleasure, (though unfit,</p>
					<p class="i2">He added modestly, when rebels railed,)</p>
					<p>To hold some sinecures he wished abolished,</p>
					<p>But that with them all Law would be demolished.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was "free to confess"—(whence comes this phrase?</p>
					<p class="i2">Is 't English? No—'tis only parliamentary)</p>
					<p>That Innovation's spirit now-a-days</p>
					<p class="i2">Had made more progress than for the last century.</p>
					<p>He would not tread a factious path to praise,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though for the public weal disposed to venture high;</p>
					<p>As for his place, he could but say this of it,</p>
					<p>That the fatigue was greater than the profit.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Heaven, and his friends, knew that a private life</p>
					<p class="i2">Had ever been his sole and whole ambition;</p>
					<p>But could he quit his King in times of strife,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which threatened the whole country with perdition?</p>
					<p>When demagogues would with a butcher's knife</p>
					<p class="i2">Cut through and through (oh! damnable incision!)</p>
					<p>The Gordian or the G<i>e</i>ordi-an knot, whose strings</p>
					<p>Have tied together Commons, Lords, and Kings.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sooner "come Place into the Civil List</p>
					<p class="i2">And champion him to the utmost<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_797">[797]</a>—" he would keep it,</p>
					<p>Till duly disappointed or dismissed:</p>
					<p class="i2">Profit he cared not for, let others reap it;</p>
					<p>But should the day come when Place ceased to exist,</p>
					<p class="i2">The country would have far more cause to weep it:</p>
					<p>For how could it go on? Explain who can!</p>
					<p><i>He</i> gloried in the name of Englishman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was as independent—aye, much more—</p>
					<p class="i2">Than those who were not paid for independence,</p>
					<p>As common soldiers, or a common——shore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have in their several arts or parts ascendance</p>
					<p>O'er the irregulars in lust or gore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who do not give professional attendance.</p>
					<p>Thus on the mob all statesmen are as eager</p>
					<p>To prove their pride, as footmen to a beggar.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All this (save the last stanza) Henry said,</p>
					<p class="i2">And thought. I say no more—I've said too much;</p>
					<p>For all of us have either heard or read—</p>
					<p class="i2">Off—or <i>upon</i> the hustings—some slight such</p>
					<p>Hints from the independent heart or head</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the official candidate. I'll touch</p>
					<p>No more on this—the dinner-bell hath rung,</p>
					<p>And grace is said; the grace I <i>should</i> have <i>sung</i>—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But I'm too late, and therefore must make play.</p>
					<p class="i2">'Twas a great banquet, such as Albion old</p>
					<p>Was wont to boast—as if a glutton's tray</p>
					<p class="i2">Were something very glorious to behold.</p>
					<p>But 'twas a public feast and public day,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Quite full—right dull—guests hot, and dishes cold,—</p>
					<p>Great plenty, much formality, small cheer,—</p>
					<p>And everybody out of their own sphere.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The squires familiarly formal, and</p>
					<p class="i2">My Lords and Ladies proudly condescending;</p>
					<p>The very servants puzzling how to hand</p>
					<p class="i2">Their plates—without it might be too much bending</p>
					<p>From their high places by the sideboard's stand—</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet, like their masters, fearful of offending;</p>
					<p>For any deviation from the graces</p>
					<p>Might cost both man and master too—their <i>places</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were some hunters bold, and coursers keen,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose hounds ne'er erred, nor greyhounds deigned to lurch;</p>
					<p>Some deadly shots too, Septembrizers,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_798">[798]</a> seen</p>
					<p class="i2">Earliest to rise, and last to quit the search</p>
					<p>Of the poor partridge through his stubble screen.</p>
					<p class="i2">There were some massy members of the church,</p>
					<p>Takers of tithes, and makers of good matches,</p>
					<p>And several who sung fewer psalms than catches.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were some country wags too—and, alas!</p>
					<p class="i2">Some exiles from the Town, who had been driven</p>
					<p>To gaze, instead of pavement, upon grass,</p>
					<p class="i2">And rise at nine in lieu of long eleven.</p>
					<p>And lo! upon that day it came to pass,</p>
					<p class="i2">I sate next that o'erwhelming son of Heaven,</p>
					<p>The very powerful parson, Peter Pith,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_799">[799]</a></p>
					<p>The loudest wit I e'er was deafened with.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I knew him in his livelier London days,</p>
					<p class="i2">A brilliant diner-out, though but a curate,</p>
					<p>And not a joke he cut but earned its praise,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until Preferment, coming at a sure rate,</p>
					<p>(O Providence! how wondrous are thy ways!</p>
					<p class="i2">Who would suppose thy gifts sometimes obdurate?)</p>
					<p>Gave him, to lay the Devil who looks o'er Lincoln,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_800">[800]</a></p>
					<p>A fat fen vicarage, and nought to think on.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His jokes were sermons, and his sermons jokes;</p>
					<p class="i2">But both were thrown away amongst the fens;</p>
					<p>For Wit hath no great friend in aguish folks.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OD">[OD]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">No longer ready ears and short-hand pens</p>
					<p>Imbibed the gay <i>bon-mot</i>, or happy hoax:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OE">[OE]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The poor priest was reduced to common sense,</p>
					<p>Or to coarse efforts very loud and long,</p>
					<p>To hammer a hoarse laugh from the thick throng.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OF">[OF]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There <i>is</i> a difference, says the song, "between</p>
					<p class="i2">A beggar and a Queen,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_801">[801]</a> or <i>was</i> (of late</p>
					<p>The latter worse used of the two we've seen—</p>
					<p class="i2">But we 'll say nothing of affairs of state);</p>
					<p>A difference "'twixt a Bishop and a Dean,"</p>
					<p class="i2">A difference between crockery ware and plate,</p>
					<p>As between English beef and Spartan broth—</p>
					<p>And yet great heroes have been bred by both.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But of all Nature's discrepancies, none</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon the whole is greater than the difference</p>
					<p>Beheld between the Country and the Town,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of which the latter merits every preference</p>
					<p>From those who have few resources of their own.</p>
					<p class="i2">And only think, or act, or feel, with reference</p>
					<p>To some small plan of interest or ambition—</p>
					<p>Both which are limited to no condition.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But <i>En avant!</i> The light loves languish o'er</p>
					<p class="i2">Long banquets and too many guests, although</p>
					<p>A slight repast makes people love much more,</p>
					<p class="i2">Bacchus and Ceres being, as we know,</p>
					<p>Even from our grammar upwards, friends of yore</p>
					<p class="i2">With vivifying Venus,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_802">[802]</a> who doth owe</p>
					<p>To these the invention of champagne and truffles:</p>
					<p>Temperance delights her, but long fasting ruffles.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Dully passed o'er the dinner of the day;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan took his place, he knew not where,</p>
					<p>Confused, in the confusion, and <i>distrait</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">And sitting as if nailed upon his chair:</p>
					<p>Though knives and forks clanked round as in a fray,</p>
					<p class="i2">He seemed unconscious of all passing there,</p>
					<p>Till some one, with a groan, expressed a wish</p>
					<p>(Unheeded twice) to have a fin of fish.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>On which, at the <i>third</i> asking of the banns,</p>
					<p class="i2">He started; and perceiving smiles around</p>
					<p>Broadening to grins, he coloured more than once,</p>
					<p class="i2">And hastily—as nothing can confound</p>
					<p>A wise man more than laughter from a dunce—</p>
					<p class="i2">Inflicted on the dish a deadly wound,</p>
					<p>And with such hurry, that, ere he could curb it,</p>
					<p>He had paid his neighbour's prayer with half a turbot.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This was no bad mistake, as it occurred,</p>
					<p class="i2">The supplicator being an amateur;</p>
					<p>But others, who were left with scarce a third,</p>
					<p class="i2">Were angry—as they well might, to be sure,</p>
					<p>They wondered how a young man so absurd</p>
					<p class="i2">Lord Henry at his table should endure;</p>
					<p>And this, and his not knowing how much oats</p>
					<p>Had fallen last market, cost his host three votes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They little knew, or might have sympathized,</p>
					<p class="i2">That he the night before had seen a ghost,</p>
					<p>A prologue which but slightly harmonized</p>
					<p class="i2">With the substantial company engrossed</p>
					<p>By matter, and so much materialised,</p>
					<p class="i2">That one scarce knew at what to marvel most</p>
					<p>Of two things—<i>how</i> (the question rather odd is)</p>
					<p>Such bodies could have souls, or souls such bodies!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But what confused him more than smile or stare</p>
					<p class="i2">From all the 'squires and 'squiresses around,</p>
					<p>Who wondered at the abstraction of his air,</p>
					<p class="i2">Especially as he had been renowned</p>
					<p>For some vivacity among the fair,</p>
					<p class="i2">Even in the country circle's narrow bound—</p>
					<p>(For little things upon my Lord's estate</p>
					<p>Were good small talk for others still less great)—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Was, that he caught Aurora's eye on his,</p>
					<p class="i2">And something like a smile upon her cheek.</p>
					<p>Now this he really rather took amiss;</p>
					<p class="i2">In those who rarely smile, their smile bespeaks</p>
					<p>A strong external motive; and in this</p>
					<p class="i2">Smile of Aurora's there was nought to pique,</p>
					<p>Or Hope, or Love—with any of the wiles</p>
					<p>Which some pretend to trace in ladies' smiles.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'Twas a mere quiet smile of contemplation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Indicative of some surprise and pity;</p>
					<p>And Juan grew carnation with vexation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which was not very wise, and still less witty,</p>
					<p>Since he had gained at least her observation,</p>
					<p class="i2">A most important outwork of the city—</p>
					<p>As Juan should have known, had not his senses</p>
					<p>By last night's Ghost been driven from their defences.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But what was bad, she did not blush in turn,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor seem embarrassed—quite the contrary;</p>
					<p>Her aspect was as usual, still—<i>not</i> stern—</p>
					<p class="i2">And she withdrew, but cast not down, her eye,</p>
					<p>Yet grew a little pale—with what? concern?</p>
					<p class="i2">I know not; but her colour ne'er was high—</p>
					<p>Though sometimes faintly flushed—and always clear,</p>
					<p>As deep seas in a sunny atmosphere.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Adeline was occupied by fame</p>
					<p class="i2">This day; and watching, witching, condescending</p>
					<p>To the consumers of fish, fowl, and game,</p>
					<p class="i2">And dignity with courtesy so blending,</p>
					<p>As all must blend whose part it is to aim</p>
					<p class="i2">(Especially as the sixth year is ending)</p>
					<p>At their lord's, son's, or similar connection's</p>
					<p>Safe conduct through the rocks of re-elections.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Though this was most expedient on the whole</p>
					<p class="i2">And usual—Juan, when he cast a glance</p>
					<p>On Adeline while playing her grand <i>rôle</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which she went through as though it were a dance,</p>
					<p>Betraying only now and then her soul</p>
					<p class="i2">By a look scarce perceptibly askance</p>
					<p>(Of weariness or scorn), began to feel</p>
					<p>Some doubt how much of Adeline was <i>real</i>;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>So well she acted all and every part</p>
					<p class="i2">By turns—with that vivacious versatility,</p>
					<p>Which many people take for want of heart.</p>
					<p class="i2">They err—'tis merely what is called mobility,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_803">[803]</a></p>
					<p>A thing of temperament and not of art,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though seeming so, from its supposed facility;</p>
					<p>And false—though true; for, surely, they're sincerest</p>
					<p>Who are strongly acted on by what is nearest.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This makes your actors, artists, and romancers,</p>
					<p class="i2">Heroes sometimes, though seldom—sages never:</p>
					<p>But speakers, bards, diplomatists, and dancers,</p>
					<p class="i2">Little that's great, but much of what is clever;</p>
					<p>Most orators, but very few financiers,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though all Exchequer Chancellors endeavour,</p>
					<p>Of late years, to dispense with Cocker's rigours,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_804">[804]</a></p>
					<p>And grow quite figurative with their figures.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The poets of Arithmetic are they</p>
					<p class="i2">Who, though they prove not two and two to be</p>
					<p>Five, as they might do in a modest way,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have plainly made it out that four are three,</p>
					<p>Judging by what they take, and what they pay:</p>
					<p class="i2">The Sinking Fund's unfathomable sea,</p>
					<p>That most unliquidating liquid, leaves</p>
					<p>The debt unsunk, yet sinks all it receives.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>C.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>While Adeline dispensed her airs and graces,</p>
					<p class="i2">The fair Fitz-Fulke seemed very much at ease;</p>
					<p>Though too well bred to quiz men to their faces,</p>
					<p class="i2">Her laughing blue eyes with a glance could seize</p>
					<p>The ridicules of people in all places—</p>
					<p class="i2">That honey of your fashionable bees—</p>
					<p>And store it up for mischievous enjoyment;</p>
					<p>And this at present was her kind employment.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>However, the day closed, as days must close;</p>
					<p class="i2">The evening also waned—and coffee came.</p>
					<p>Each carriage was announced, and ladies rose,</p>
					<p class="i2">And curtsying off, as curtsies country dame,</p>
					<p>Retired: with most unfashionable bows</p>
					<p class="i2">Their docile Esquires also did the same,</p>
					<p>Delighted with their dinner and their Host,</p>
					<p>But with the Lady Adeline the most.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some praised her beauty: others her great grace;</p>
					<p class="i2">The warmth of her politeness, whose sincerity</p>
					<p>Was obvious in each feature of her face,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose traits were radiant with the rays of verity.</p>
					<p>Yes; <i>she</i> was truly worthy <i>her</i> high place!</p>
					<p class="i2">No one could envy her deserved prosperity.</p>
					<p>And then her dress—what beautiful simplicity</p>
					<p>Draperied her form with curious felicity!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_805">[805]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Meanwhile sweet Adeline deserved their praises,</p>
					<p class="i2">By an impartial indemnification</p>
					<p>For all her past exertion and soft phrases,</p>
					<p class="i2">In a most edifying conversation,</p>
					<p>Which turned upon their late guests' miens and faces,</p>
					<p class="i2">Their families, even to the last relation;</p>
					<p>Their hideous wives, their horrid selves and dresses,</p>
					<p>And truculent distortion of their tresses.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>True, <i>she</i> said little—'twas the rest that broke</p>
					<p class="i2">Forth into universal epigram;</p>
					<p>But then 'twas to the purpose what she spoke:</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Addison's "faint praise,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_806">[806]</a> so wont to damn,</p>
					<p>Her own but served to set off every joke,</p>
					<p class="i2">As music chimes in with a melodrame.</p>
					<p>How sweet the task to shield an absent friend!</p>
					<p>I ask but this of mine, to——<i>not</i> defend.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were but two exceptions to this keen</p>
					<p class="i2">Skirmish of wits o'er the departed; one,</p>
					<p>Aurora, with her pure and placid mien;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan, too, in general behind none</p>
					<p>In gay remark on what he had heard or seen,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sate silent now, his usual spirits gone:</p>
					<p>In vain he heard the others rail or rally,</p>
					<p>He would not join them in a single sally.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'Tis true he saw Aurora look as though</p>
					<p class="i2">She approved his silence; she perhaps mistook</p>
					<p>Its motive for that charity we owe</p>
					<p class="i2">But seldom pay the absent, nor would look</p>
					<p>Farther—it might or it might not be so.</p>
					<p class="i2">But Juan, sitting silent in his nook,</p>
					<p>Observing little in his reverie,</p>
					<p>Yet saw this much, which he was glad to see.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Ghost at least had done him this much good,</p>
					<p class="i2">In making him as silent as a ghost,</p>
					<p>If in the circumstances which ensued</p>
					<p class="i2">He gained esteem where it was worth the most;</p>
					<p>And, certainly, Aurora had renewed</p>
					<p class="i2">In him some feelings he had lately lost,</p>
					<p>Or hardened; feelings which, perhaps ideal,</p>
					<p>Are so divine, that I must deem them real:—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The love of higher things and better days;</p>
					<p class="i2">The unbounded hope, and heavenly ignorance</p>
					<p>Of what is called the World, and the World's ways;</p>
					<p class="i2">The moments when we gather from a glance</p>
					<p>More joy than from all future pride or praise,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which kindle manhood, but can ne'er entrance</p>
					<p>The Heart in an existence of its own,</p>
					<p>Of which another's bosom is the zone.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Who would not sigh <span title="Ai)/ ai)/ ta\n Kythe/reian">Αἴ αἴ τὰν Κυθέρειαν</span><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_807">[807]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">That <i>hath</i> a memory, or that <i>had</i> a heart?</p>
					<p>Alas! <i>her</i> star must fade like that of Dian:</p>
					<p class="i2">Ray fades on ray, as years on years depart.</p>
					<p>Anacreon only had the soul to tie an</p>
					<p class="i2">Unwithering myrtle round the unblunted dart</p>
					<p>Of Eros: but though thou hast played us many tricks,</p>
					<p>Still we respect thee, "<i>Alma Venus Genetrix!</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_808">[808]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And full of sentiments, sublime as billows</p>
					<p class="i2">Heaving between this World and Worlds beyond,</p>
					<p>Don Juan, when the midnight hour of pillows</p>
					<p class="i2">Arrived, retired to his; but to despond</p>
					<p>Rather than rest. Instead of poppies, willows</p>
					<p class="i2">Waved o'er his couch; he meditated, fond</p>
					<p>Of those sweet bitter thoughts which banish sleep,</p>
					<p>And make the worldling sneer, the youngling weep.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The night was as before: he was undrest,</p>
					<p class="i2">Saving his night-gown, which is an undress;</p>
					<p>Completely <i>sans culotte</i>, and without vest;</p>
					<p class="i2">In short, he hardly could be clothed with less:</p>
					<p>But apprehensive of his spectral guest,</p>
					<p class="i2">He sate with feelings awkward to express</p>
					<p>(By those who have not had such visitations),</p>
					<p>Expectant of the Ghost's fresh operations.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And not in vain he listened;—Hush! what's that?</p>
					<p class="i2">I see—I see—Ah, no!—'t is not—yet 't is—</p>
					<p>Ye powers! it is the—the—the—Pooh! the cat!</p>
					<p class="i2">The Devil may take that stealthy pace of his!</p>
					<p>So like a spiritual pit-a-pat,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or tiptoe of an amatory Miss,</p>
					<p>Gliding the first time to a <i>rendezvous</i>,</p>
					<p>And dreading the chaste echoes of her shoe.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Again—what is 't? The wind? No, no,—this time</p>
					<p class="i2">It is the sable Friar as before,</p>
					<p>With awful footsteps regular as rhyme,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or (as rhymes may be in these days) much more.</p>
					<p>Again through shadows of the night sublime,</p>
					<p class="i2">When deep sleep fell on men,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_809">[809]</a> and the World wore</p>
					<p>The starry darkness round her like a girdle</p>
					<p>Spangled with gems—the Monk made his blood curdle.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A noise like to wet fingers drawn on glass,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_810">[810]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Which sets the teeth on edge; and a slight clatter,</p>
					<p>Like showers which on the midnight gusts will pass,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sounding like very supernatural water,</p>
					<p>Came over Juan's ear, which throbbed, alas!</p>
					<p class="i2">For Immaterialism's a serious matter;</p>
					<p>So that even those whose faith is the most great</p>
					<p>In Souls immortal, shun them <i>tête-à-tête</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Were his eyes open?—Yes! and his mouth too.</p>
					<p class="i2">Surprise has this effect—to make one dumb,</p>
					<p>Yet leave the gate which Eloquence slips through</p>
					<p class="i2">As wide as if a long speech were to come.</p>
					<p>Nigh and more nigh the awful echoes drew,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tremendous to a mortal tympanum:</p>
					<p>His eyes were open, and (as was before</p>
					<p>Stated) his mouth. What opened next?—the door.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It opened with a most infernal creak,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like that of Hell. "Lasciate ogni speranza,</p>
					<p>Voi, ch' entrate!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_811">[811]</a> The hinge seemed to speak,</p>
					<p class="i2">Dreadful as Dante's <i>rima</i>, or this stanza;</p>
					<p>Or—but all words upon such themes are weak:</p>
					<p class="i2">A single shade's sufficient to entrance a</p>
					<p>Hero—for what is Substance to a Spirit?</p>
					<p>Or how is 't <i>Matter</i> trembles to come near it?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OG">[OG]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The door flew wide, not swiftly,—but, as fly</p>
					<p class="i2">The sea-gulls, with a steady, sober flight—</p>
					<p>And then swung back; nor close—but stood awry,</p>
					<p class="i2">Half letting in long shadows on the light,</p>
					<p>Which still in Juan's candlesticks burned high,</p>
					<p class="i2">For he had two, both tolerably bright,</p>
					<p>And in the doorway, darkening darkness, stood</p>
					<p>The sable Friar in his solemn hood.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan shook, as erst he had been shaken</p>
					<p class="i2">The night before; but being sick of shaking,</p>
					<p>He first inclined to think he had been mistaken;</p>
					<p class="i2">And then to be ashamed of such mistaking;</p>
					<p>His own internal ghost began to awaken</p>
					<p class="i2">Within him, and to quell his corporal quaking—</p>
					<p>Hinting that Soul and Body on the whole</p>
					<p>Were odds against a disembodied Soul.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then his dread grew wrath, and his wrath fierce,</p>
					<p class="i2">And he arose, advanced—the Shade retreated;</p>
					<p>But Juan, eager now the truth to pierce,</p>
					<p class="i2">Followed, his veins no longer cold, but heated,</p>
					<p>Resolved to thrust the mystery <i>carte</i> and <i>tierce</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">At whatsoever risk of being defeated:</p>
					<p>The Ghost stopped, menaced, then retired, until</p>
					<p>He reached the ancient wall, then stood stone still.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan put forth one arm—Eternal powers!</p>
					<p class="i2">It touched no soul, nor body, but the wall,</p>
					<p>On which the moonbeams fell in silvery showers,</p>
					<p class="i2">Chequered with all the tracery of the Hall;</p>
					<p>He shuddered, as no doubt the bravest cowers</p>
					<p class="i2">When he can't tell what 'tis that doth appal.</p>
					<p>How odd, a single hobgoblin's nonentity</p>
					<p>Should cause more fear than a whole host's identity!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But still the Shade remained: the blue eyes glared,</p>
					<p class="i2">And rather variably for stony death;</p>
					<p>Yet one thing rather good the grave had spared,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Ghost had a remarkably sweet breath:</p>
					<p>A straggling curl showed he had been fair-haired;</p>
					<p class="i2">A red lip, with two rows of pearls beneath,</p>
					<p>Gleamed forth, as through the casement's ivy shroud</p>
					<p>The Moon peeped, just escaped from a grey cloud.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Juan, puzzled, but still curious, thrust</p>
					<p class="i2">His other arm forth—Wonder upon wonder!</p>
					<p>It pressed upon a hard but glowing bust,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which beat as if there was a warm heart under.</p>
					<p>He found, as people on most trials must,</p>
					<p class="i2">That he had made at first a silly blunder,</p>
					<p>And that in his confusion he had caught</p>
					<p>Only the wall, instead of what he sought.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Ghost, if Ghost it were, seemed a sweet soul</p>
					<p class="i2">As ever lurked beneath a holy hood:</p>
					<p>A dimpled chin,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_OH">[OH]</a> a neck of ivory, stole</p>
					<p class="i2">Forth into something much like flesh and blood;</p>
					<p>Back fell the sable frock and dreary cowl,</p>
					<p class="i2">And they revealed—alas! that e'er they should!</p>
					<p>In full, voluptuous, but <i>not o'er</i>grown bulk,</p>
					<p>The phantom of her frolic Grace—Fitz-Fulke!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_812">[812]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_768"><span class="label">[768]</span></a> {572}March 29, 1823.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_769"><span class="label">[769]</span></a> [Herodotus, <i>Hist.</i>, i. 136.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_770"><span class="label">[770]</span></a> [<i>Hamlet</i>, act ii. sc. 2, line 103.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_771"><span class="label">[771]</span></a> {573}[The story is told of St. Thomas Aquinas, that he wrote a work <i>De Omnibus Rebus</i>, which was followed by a second treatise, <i>De Quibusdam Aliis.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_772"><span class="label">[772]</span></a> [Not St. Augustine, but Tertullian. See his treatise, <i>De Carne Christi</i>, cap. V. c. (<i>Opera</i>, 1744, p. 310): "Crucifixus est Dei filius: non pudet, quia pudendum est: et mortuus est Dei filius: prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est: et sepultus resurrexit: certum est quia impossibile est."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_773"><span class="label">[773]</span></a> {574}["That the dead are seen no more," said Imlac, "I will not undertake to maintain, against the concurrent and unvaried testimony of all ages, and of all nations. There is no people, rude or unlearned, among whom apparitions of the dead are not related and believed. This opinion, which perhaps prevails as far as human nature is diffused, could become universal only by its truth; those that never heard of one another would not have agreed in a tale which nothing but experience can make credible. That it is doubted by single cavillers, can very little weaken the general evidence; and some, who deny it with their tongues, confess it with their fears."—<i>Rasselas</i>, chap. xxx., <i>Works</i>, ed. 1806, iii. 372, 373.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_774"><span class="label">[774]</span></a> {575}The composition of the old Tyrian purple, whether from a shell-fish, or from cochineal, or from kermes, is still an article of dispute; and even its colour—some say purple, others scarlet: I say nothing.</p>
					<p>[Kermes is cochineal, the Greek <span title="ko/kkinon">κόκκινον</span>. The shell-fish (<i>murex</i>) is the <i>Purpura patula</i>. Both substances were used as dyes.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_775"><span class="label">[775]</span></a> [See Ovid, <i>Heroid</i>, Epist. ix. line 161.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_776"><span class="label">[776]</span></a> [Titus used to promise to "bear in mind," "to keep on his list," the petitions of all his supplicants, and once, at dinner-time, his conscience smote him, that he had let a day go by without a single grant, or pardon, or promotion. Hence his confession. "Amici, diem perdidi!" <i>Vide</i> Suetonius, <i>De XII. Cæs.</i>, "Titus," lib. viii. cap. 8.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_777"><span class="label">[777]</span></a> [<i>Tuism</i> is not in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>. Coleridge has a note dated 1800 (<i>Literary Remains</i>, i. 292), on "egotizing in <i>tuism</i>" but it was not included in Southey's <i>Omniana</i> of 1812, and must have been unknown to Byron.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_778"><span class="label">[778]</span></a> {576}[Sc. <i>toilette</i>, a Gallicism.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_779"><span class="label">[779]</span></a> [Byron loved to make fact and fancy walk together, but, here, his memory played him false, or his art kept him true. The Black Friar walked and walks in the Guests' Refectory (or Banqueting Hall, or "Gallery" of this stanza), which adjoins the Prior's Parlour, but the room where Byron slept (in a four-post bed—a coronet, at each corner, atop) is on the floor above the Prior's Parlour, and can only be approached by a spiral staircase. Both rooms look west, and command a view of the "lake's billow" and the "cascade." Moreover, the Guests' Refectory was never hung with "old pictures." It would seem that Don Juan (perhaps Byron on an emergency) slept in the Prior's Parlour, and that in the visionary Newstead the pictures forsook the Grand Drawing-Room for the Hall. Hence the scene! <i>El Libertado</i> steps out of the Gothic Chamber "forth" into the "gallery," and lo! "a monk in cowl and beads." But, <i>Quien sabe?</i> The Psalmist's caution with regard to princes is not inapplicable to poets.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_780"><span class="label">[780]</span></a> {577}[Compare Mariner's description of the cave in Hoonga Island (<i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 629, note 1).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_781"><span class="label">[781]</span></a> {578}["The place," wrote Byron to Moore, August 13, 1814, "is worth seeing as a ruin, and I can assure you there <i>was</i> some fun there, even in my time; but that is past. The ghosts, however, and the Gothics, and the waters, and the desolation, make it very lively still." "It was," comments Moore (<i>Life</i>, p. 262, note 1), "if I mistake not, during his recent visit to Newstead, that he himself actually fancied he saw the ghost of the Black Friar, which was supposed to have haunted the Abbey from the time of the dissolution of the monasteries, and which he thus describes from the recollection, perhaps, of his own fantasy, in <i>Don Juan</i>.... It is said that the Newstead ghost appeared, also, to Lord Byron's cousin, Miss Fanny Parkins, and that she made a sketch of him from memory." The legend of the Black Friar may, it is believed at Newstead (<i>et vide post</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#songs2">"Song," stanza ii</a>. line 5, p. 583), be traced to the alarm and suspicion of the country-folk, who, on visiting the Abbey, would now and then catch sight of an aged lay-brother, or monkish domestic, who had been retained in the service of the Byrons long after the Canons had been "turned adrift." He would naturally keep out of sight of a generation who knew not monks, and, when surprised in the cloisters or ruins of the church, would glide back to his own quarters in the dormitories.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_782">
							<span class="label">[782]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Shew his eyes, and grieve his heart;</p>
							<p class="i2">Come like shadows, so depart."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. 1, lines 110, 111.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_NZ"><span class="label">[NZ]</span></a> {582}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>With that she rose as graceful as a Roe</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Slips from the mountain in the month of June,</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>And opening her Piano 'gan to play</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Forthwith—"It was a Friar of Orders Gray."</i>—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OA"><span class="label">[OA]</span></a> {584}<i>By their bed of death he receives their</i> [<i>breath</i>].—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_783"><span class="label">[783]</span></a> {585}I think that it was a carpet on which Diogenes trod, with—"Thus I trample on the pride of Plato!"—"With greater pride," as the other replied. But as carpets are meant to be trodden upon, my memory probably misgives me, and it might be a robe, or tapestry, or a table-cloth, or some other expensive and uncynical piece of furniture.</p>
					<p>[It was Plato's couch or lounge which Diogenes stamped upon. "So much for Plato's pride!" "And how much for yours, Diogenes?" "Calco Platonis fastum!" "Ast fastu alio?" (<i>Vide</i> Diogenis Laertii <i>De Vita et Sententiis</i>, lib. vi. ed. 1595, p. 321.)</p>
					<p>For "Attic Bee," <i>vide</i> Cic. I. <i>De Div.</i>, xxxvi. § 78, "At Platoni cum in cunis parvulo dormienti apes in labellis consedissent, responsum est, singulari illum suavitate orationis fore."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_784"><span class="label">[784]</span></a> {586}[For two translations of this Portuguese song, see <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 71.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_785"><span class="label">[785]</span></a> I remember that the mayoress of a provincial town, somewhat surfeited with a similar display from foreign parts, did rather indecorously break through the applauses of an intelligent audience—intelligent, I mean, as to music—for the words, besides being in recondite languages (it was some years before the peace, ere all the world had travelled, and while I was a collegian), were sorely disguised by the performers:—this mayoress, I say, broke out with, "Rot your Italianos! for my part, I loves a simple ballat!" Rossini will go a good way to bring most people to the same opinion some day. Who would imagine that he was to be the successor of Mozart? However, I state this with diffidence, as a liege and loyal admirer of Italian music in general, and of much of Rossini's; but we may say, as the connoisseur did of painting in <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i>, that "the picture would be better painted if the painter had taken more pains."</p>
					<p>[A little while, and Rossini is being lauded at the expense of a degenerate modern rival. Compare Browning's <i>Bishop Blougram's Apology</i>. "Where sits Rossini patient in his stall."—<i>Poetical Works</i>, ed. 1868, v. 276.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_786"><span class="label">[786]</span></a> [Compare <i>The Two Foscari</i>, act iii. sc. 1, line 172, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 159, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_787"><span class="label">[787]</span></a> {587}[Of Lady Beaumont, who was "weak enough" to admire Wordsworth, see <i>The Blues</i>, Ecl. II. line 47, <i>sq.</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 582.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_788"><span class="label">[788]</span></a> [Christopher Anstey (1724-1802) published his <i>New Bath Guide</i> in 1766.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_789"><span class="label">[789]</span></a> [Compare <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, lines 309-318, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 321, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_790"><span class="label">[790]</span></a> {588}[For "Gynocracy," <i>vide ante</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#Footnote_638">p. 473, note 1</a>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OB"><span class="label">[OB]</span></a> {589}<i>Thrower down of buildings</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_791"><span class="label">[791]</span></a> [Byron had, no doubt, inspected the plan of Colonel Wildman's elaborate restoration of the Abbey, which was carried out at a cost of one hundred thousand pounds (see <a class="pginternal" href="#c16slix">stanza lix</a>. lines 1, 2). The kitchen and domestic offices, which extended at right angles to the west front of the Abbey (see "Newstead from a Picture by Peter Tilleman, <i>circ.</i> 1720" <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. (to face p.) 216), were pulled down and rebuilt, the massive Sussex Tower (so named in honour of H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex) was erected at the south-west corner of the Abbey, and the south front was, in part, rebuilt and redecorated. Byron had been ready to "leave everything" with regard to his beloved Newstead to Wildman's "own feelings, present or future" (see his letter, November 18, 1818, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 270); but when the time came, the necessary and, on the whole, judicious alterations of his successor, must have cost the "banished Lord" many a pang.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_792"><span class="label">[792]</span></a> {590}"Ausu Romano, sere Veneto" is the inscription (and well inscribed in this instance) on the sea walls between the Adriatic and Venice. The walls were a republican work of the Venetians; the inscription, I believe, Imperial; and inscribed by Napoleon the <i>First</i>. It is time to continue to him that title—there will be a second by and by, "Spes altera mundi," <i>if he live</i>; let him not defeat it like his father. But in any case, he will be preferable to "<i>Imbéciles</i>." There is a glorious field for him, if he know how to cultivate it.</p>
					<p>[Francis Charles Joseph Napoleon, Duke of Reichstadt, died at Vienna, July 22, 1832. But, none the less, Byron's prophecy was fulfilled.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_793"><span class="label">[793]</span></a> [Burgage, or tenure in burgage, is where the king or some other person is lord of an ancient borough, in which the tenements are held by a yearly rent certain.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_794">
							<span class="label">[794]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["I conjure you, by that which you profess,</p>
							<p class="i2">(Howe'er you come to know it) answer me:</p>
							<p class="i2">Though you <i>untie</i> the winds, and let them fight</p>
							<p class="i2">Against the <i>churches</i>."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. 1, lines 50-53.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_795"><span class="label">[795]</span></a> {591}[See the lines "To my Son," <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 260, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_796"><span class="label">[796]</span></a> {592}[See Spenser's <i>Faëry Queen</i>, Book I. Canto IX. stanza 6, line 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OC">
							<span class="label">[OC]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>To name what passes for a puzzle rather,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Although there must be such a thing—a father</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_797"><span class="label">[797]</span></a> {594}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Rather than so, come, Fate, into the list,</p>
							<p class="i2">And champion me to the utterance."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 1, lines 70, 71.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_798"><span class="label">[798]</span></a> {595}[For "Septemberers (<i>Septembriseurs</i>)," see Carlyle's <i>French Revolution</i>, 1839, iii. 50.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_799"><span class="label">[799]</span></a> {596}["Query, <i>Sydney Smith</i>, author of Peter Plymley's Letters?—Printer's Devil."—Ed. 1833. Byron must have met Sydney Smith (1771-1845) at Holland House. The "fat fen vicarage" (<i>vide infra</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#c16slxxxii">stanza lxxxii. line 8</a>) was Foston-le-Clay (Foston, All Saints), near Barton Hill, Yorkshire, which Lord Chancellor Erskine presented to Sydney Smith in 1806. The "living" consisted of "three hundred acres of glebe-land of the stiffest clay," and there was no parsonage house.—See <i>A Memoir of the Rev. Sydney Smith</i>, by Lady Holland, 1855, i. 100-107.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_800"><span class="label">[800]</span></a> ["Observe, also, three grotesque figures in the blank arches of the gable which forms the eastern end of St. Hugh's Chapel," and of these, "one is popularly said to represent the 'Devil looking over Lincoln.'"—<i>Handbook to the Cathedrals of England</i>, by R.J. King, <i>Eastern Division</i>, p. 394, note x.</p>
					<p>The devil looked over Lincoln because the unexampled height of the central tower of the cathedral excited his envy and alarm; or, as Fuller (<i>Worthies: Lincolnshire</i>) has it, "overlooked this church, when first finished, with a torve and tetrick countenance, as maligning men's costly devotions." So, at least, the vanity of later ages interpreted the saying; but a time was when the devil "looked over" Lincoln to some purpose, for in A.D. 1185 an earthquake clave the Church of Remigius in twain, and in 1235 a great part of the central tower, which had been erected by Bishop Hugh de Wells, fell and injured the rest of the building.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OD"><span class="label">[OD]</span></a> {597}<i>For laughter rarely shakes these aguish folks</i>.—[MS, erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OE"><span class="label">[OE]</span></a> <i>Took down the gay</i> bon-mot——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OF"><span class="label">[OF]</span></a> <i>To hammer half a laugh</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_801">
							<span class="label">[801]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["There's a difference to be seen between a beggar and a Queen;</p>
							<p class="i4">And I 'll tell you the reason why;</p>
							<p class="i2">A Queen does not swagger, nor get drunk like a beggar,</p>
							<p class="i4">Nor be half so merry as I," etc.</p>
						</div>
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"There's a difference to be seen,'twixt a Bishop and a Dean,</p>
							<p class="i4">And I'll tell you the reason why;</p>
							<p class="i2">A Dean can not dish up a dinner like a Bishop,</p>
							<p class="i4">And that's the reason why!"]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_802"><span class="label">[802]</span></a> {598}["Sine Cerere et Libero friget Venus." Terentius, <i>Eun.</i>, act iv. sc. 5, line 6.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_803"><span class="label">[803]</span></a> {601}In French "<i>mobilité</i>." I am not sure that mobility is English; but it is expressive of a quality which rather belongs to other climates, though it is sometimes seen to a great extent in our own. It may be defined as an excessive susceptibility of immediate impressions—at the same time without <i>losing</i> the past: and is, though sometimes apparently useful to the possessor, a most painful and unhappy attribute.</p>
					<p>["That he was fully aware not only of the abundance of this quality in his own nature, but of the danger in which it placed consistency and singleness of character, did not require the note on this passage to assure us. The consciousness, indeed, of his own natural tendency to yield thus to every chance impression, and change with every passing impulse, was not only for ever present in his mind, but ... had the effect of keeping him in that general line of consistency, on certain great subjects, which ... he continued to preserve throughout life."—<i>Life</i>, p. 646. "Mobility" is not the tendency to yield to <i>every</i> impression, to change with <i>every</i> impulse, but the capability of being moved by many and various impressions, of responding to an ever-renewed succession of impulses. Byron is defending the enthusiastic temperament from the charge of inconstancy and insincerity.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_804"><span class="label">[804]</span></a> [The first edition of Cocker's <i>Arithmetic</i> was published in 1677. There are many allusions to Cocker in Arthur Murphy's <i>Apprentice</i> (1756), whence, perhaps, the saying, "according to Cocker."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_805"><span class="label">[805]</span></a> {602} "[Et Horatii] Curiosa felicitas."—Petronius Arbiter, <i>Salyricôn</i>, cap. cxviii.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_806">
							<span class="label">[806]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Damn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,</p>
							<p class="i2">And without sneering, teach the rest to sneer."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Pope <i>on Addison, Prologue to the Satires</i>, lines 201, 202.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_807"><span class="label">[807]</span></a> {604}[Bion, <i>Epitaphium Adonidis</i>, line 28.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_808"><span class="label">[808]</span></a> [" ... genetrix hominum, divômque voluptas, Alma Venus!" Lucret., <i>De Rerum Nat</i>., lib. i. lines 1, 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_809"><span class="label">[809]</span></a> {605}[<i>Job</i> iv. 13.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_810"><span class="label">[810]</span></a> See the account of the ghost of the uncle of Prince Charles of Saxony, raised by Schroepfer—"Karl—Karl—was willst du mit mir?"</p>
					<p>[For Johann Georg Schrepfer (1730(?)-1774), see J.S.B. Schlegel's <i>Tagebuch, etc.</i>, 1806, and <i>Schwärmer und Schwindler</i>, von Dr. Eugen Sierke, 1874, pp. 298-332.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_811"><span class="label">[811]</span></a> {606}[<i>Inferno</i>, Canto III. line 9.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OG"><span class="label">[OG]</span></a> <i>When once discovered it don't like to come near it</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_OH"><span class="label">[OH]</span></a> {607}<i>A beardless chin</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_812"><span class="label">[812]</span></a> [End of Canto 16. B. My. 6, 1823.—MS.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
