<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto IV</h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Nothing so difficult as a beginning</p>
					<p class="i2">In poesy, unless perhaps the end;</p>
					<p>For oftentimes when Pegasus seems winning</p>
					<p class="i2">The race, he sprains a wing, and down we tend,</p>
					<p>Like Lucifer when hurled from Heaven for sinning;</p>
					<p class="i2">Our sin the same, and hard as his to mend,</p>
					<p>Being Pride,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_230">[230]</a> which leads the mind to soar too far,</p>
					<p>Till our own weakness shows us what we are.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Time, which brings all beings to their level,</p>
					<p class="i2">And sharp Adversity, will teach at last</p>
					<p>Man,—and, as we would hope,—perhaps the Devil,</p>
					<p class="i2">That neither of their intellects are vast:</p>
					<p>While Youth's hot wishes in our red veins revel,</p>
					<p class="i2">We know not this—the blood flows on too fast;</p>
					<p>But as the torrent widens towards the Ocean,</p>
					<p>We ponder deeply on each past emotion.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_231">[231]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>As boy, I thought myself a clever fellow,</p>
					<p class="i2">And wished that others held the same opinion;</p>
					<p>They took it up when my days grew more mellow,</p>
					<p class="i2">And other minds acknowledged my dominion:</p>
					<p>Now my sere Fancy "falls into the yellow</p>
					<p class="i2">Leaf,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_232">[232]</a> and Imagination droops her pinion,</p>
					<p>And the sad truth which hovers o'er my desk</p>
					<p>Turns what was once romantic to burlesque.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And if I laugh at any mortal thing,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is that I may not weep; and if I weep,</p>
					<p>'T is that our nature cannot always bring</p>
					<p class="i2">Itself to apathy, for we must steep<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DH">[DH]</a></p>
					<p>Our hearts first in the depths of Lethe's spring,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DI">[DI]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Ere what we least wish to behold will sleep:</p>
					<p>Thetis baptized her mortal son in Styx;</p>
					<p>A mortal mother would on Lethe fix.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some have accused me of a strange design</p>
					<p class="i2">Against the creed and morals of the land,</p>
					<p>And trace it in this poem every line:</p>
					<p class="i2">I don't pretend that I quite understand</p>
					<p>My own meaning when I would be <i>very</i> fine;</p>
					<p class="i2">But the fact is that I have nothing planned,</p>
					<p>Unless it were to be a moment merry—</p>
					<p>A novel word in my vocabulary.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>To the kind reader of our sober clime</p>
					<p class="i2">This way of writing will appear exotic;</p>
					<p>Pulci<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_233">[233]</a> was sire of the half-serious rhyme,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DJ">[DJ]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Who sang when Chivalry was more quixotic,</p>
					<p>And revelled in the fancies of the time,</p>
					<p class="i2">True Knights, chaste Dames, huge Giants, Kings despotic;</p>
					<p>But all these, save the last, being obsolete,</p>
					<p>I chose a modern subject as more meet.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>How I have treated it, I do not know;</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps no better than <i>they</i> have treated me,</p>
					<p>Who have imputed such designs as show</p>
					<p class="i2">Not what they saw, but what they wished to see:</p>
					<p>But if it gives them pleasure, be it so;</p>
					<p class="i2">This is a liberal age, and thoughts are free:</p>
					<p>Meantime Apollo plucks me by the ear,</p>
					<p>And tells me to resume my story here.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_234">[234]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Young Juan and his lady-love were left</p>
					<p class="i2">To their own hearts' most sweet society;</p>
					<p>Even Time the pitiless in sorrow cleft</p>
					<p class="i2">With his rude scythe such gentle bosoms; he</p>
					<p>Sighed to behold them of their hours bereft,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though foe to Love; and yet they could not be</p>
					<p>Meant to grow old, but die in happy Spring,</p>
					<p>Before one charm or hope had taken wing.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Their faces were not made for wrinkles, their</p>
					<p class="i2">Pure blood to stagnate, their great hearts to fail;</p>
					<p>The blank grey was not made to blast their hair,</p>
					<p class="i2">But like the climes that know nor snow nor hail,</p>
					<p>They were all summer; lightning might assail</p>
					<p class="i2">And shiver them to ashes, but to trail</p>
					<p>A long and snake-like life of dull decay</p>
					<p>Was not for them—they had too little clay.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They were alone once more; for them to be</p>
					<p class="i2">Thus was another Eden; they were never</p>
					<p>Weary, unless when separate: the tree</p>
					<p class="i2">Cut from its forest root of years—the river</p>
					<p>Dammed from its fountain—the child from the knee</p>
					<p class="i2">And breast maternal weaned at once for ever,—</p>
					<p>Would wither less than these two torn apart;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DK">[DK]</a></p>
					<p>Alas! there is no instinct like the Heart—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Heart—which may be broken: happy they!</p>
					<p class="i2">Thrice fortunate! who of that fragile mould,</p>
					<p>The precious porcelain of human clay,</p>
					<p class="i2">Break with the first fall: they can ne'er behold</p>
					<p>The long year linked with heavy day on day,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all which must be borne, and never told;</p>
					<p>While Life's strange principle will often lie</p>
					<p>Deepest in those who long the most to die.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Whom the gods love die young," was said of yore,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_235">[235]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And many deaths do they escape by this:</p>
					<p>The death of friends, and that which slays even more—</p>
					<p class="i2">The death of Friendship, Love, Youth, all that is,</p>
					<p>Except mere breath; and since the silent shore</p>
					<p class="i2">Awaits at last even those who longest miss</p>
					<p>The old Archer's shafts, perhaps the early grave<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_236">[236]</a></p>
					<p>Which men weep over may be meant to save.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Haidée and Juan thought not of the dead—</p>
					<p class="i2">The Heavens, and Earth, and Air, seemed made for them:</p>
					<p>They found no fault with Time, save that he fled;</p>
					<p class="i2">They saw not in themselves aught to condemn:</p>
					<p>Each was the other's mirror, and but read</p>
					<p class="i2">Joy sparkling in their dark eyes like a gem.</p>
					<p>And knew such brightness was but the reflection</p>
					<p>Of their exchanging glances of affection.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The gentle pressure, and the thrilling touch,</p>
					<p class="i2">The least glance better understood than words,</p>
					<p>Which still said all, and ne'er could say too much;</p>
					<p class="i2">A language,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_237">[237]</a> too, but like to that of birds,</p>
					<p>Known but to them, at least appearing such</p>
					<p class="i2">As but to lovers a true sense affords;</p>
					<p>Sweet playful phrases, which would seem absurd</p>
					<p>To those who have ceased to hear such, or ne'er heard—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All these were theirs, for they were children still,</p>
					<p class="i2">And children still they should have ever been;</p>
					<p>They were not made in the real world to fill</p>
					<p class="i2">A busy character in the dull scene,</p>
					<p>But like two beings born from out a rill,</p>
					<p class="i2">A Nymph and her belovéd, all unseen</p>
					<p>To pass their lives in fountains and on flowers,</p>
					<p>And never know the weight of human hours.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Moons changing had rolled on, and changeless found</p>
					<p class="i2">Those their bright rise had lighted to such joys</p>
					<p>As rarely they beheld throughout their round;</p>
					<p class="i2">And these were not of the vain kind which cloys,</p>
					<p>For theirs were buoyant spirits, never bound</p>
					<p class="i2">By the mere senses; and that which destroys<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DL">[DL]</a></p>
					<p>Most love—possession—unto them appeared</p>
					<p>A thing which each endearment more endeared.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh beautiful! and rare as beautiful!</p>
					<p class="i2">But theirs was Love in which the Mind delights</p>
					<p>To lose itself, when the old world grows dull,</p>
					<p class="i2">And we are sick of its hack sounds and sights,</p>
					<p>Intrigues, adventures of the common school,</p>
					<p class="i2">Its petty passions, marriages, and flights,</p>
					<p>Where Hymen's torch but brands one strumpet more,</p>
					<p>Whose husband only knows her not a whore.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Hard words—harsh truth! a truth which many know.</p>
					<p class="i2">Enough.—The faithful and the fairy pair,</p>
					<p>Who never found a single hour too slow,</p>
					<p class="i2">What was it made them thus exempt from care?</p>
					<p>Young innate feelings all have felt below,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which perish in the rest, but in them were</p>
					<p>Inherent—what we mortals call romantic,</p>
					<p>And always envy, though we deem it frantic.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This is in others a factitious state,</p>
					<p class="i2">An opium dream<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_238">[238]</a> of too much youth and reading,</p>
					<p>But was in them their nature or their fate:</p>
					<p class="i2">No novels e'er had set their young hearts bleeding,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DM">[DM]</a></p>
					<p>For Haidée's knowledge was by no means great,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan was a boy of saintly breeding;</p>
					<p>So that there was no reason for their loves</p>
					<p>More than for those of nightingales or doves.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They gazed upon the sunset; 't is an hour</p>
					<p class="i2">Dear unto all, but dearest to <i>their</i> eyes,</p>
					<p>For it had made them what they were: the power</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Love had first o'erwhelmed them from such skies,</p>
					<p>When Happiness had been their only dower,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Twilight saw them linked in Passion's ties;</p>
					<p>Charmed with each other, all things charmed that brought</p>
					<p>The past still welcome as the present thought.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I know not why, but in that hour to-night,</p>
					<p class="i2">Even as they gazed, a sudden tremor came,</p>
					<p>And swept, as 't were, across their hearts' delight,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like the wind o'er a harp-string, or a flame,</p>
					<p>When one is shook in sound, and one in sight:</p>
					<p class="i2">And thus some boding flashed through either frame,</p>
					<p>And called from Juan's breast a faint low sigh,</p>
					<p>While one new tear arose in Haidée's eye.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>That large black prophet eye seemed to dilate</p>
					<p class="i2">And follow far the disappearing sun,</p>
					<p>As if their last day of a happy date</p>
					<p class="i2">With his broad, bright, and dropping orb were gone;</p>
					<p>Juan gazed on her as to ask his fate—</p>
					<p class="i2">He felt a grief, but knowing cause for none,</p>
					<p>His glance inquired of hers for some excuse</p>
					<p>For feelings causeless, or at least abstruse.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She turned to him, and smiled, but in that sort</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes not others smile; then turned aside:</p>
					<p>Whatever feeling shook her, it seemed short,</p>
					<p class="i2">And mastered by her wisdom or her pride;</p>
					<p>When Juan spoke, too—it might be in sport—</p>
					<p class="i2">Of this their mutual feeling, she replied—</p>
					<p>"If it should be so,—but—it cannot be—</p>
					<p>Or I at least shall not survive to see."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan would question further, but she pressed</p>
					<p class="i2">His lip to hers, and silenced him with this,</p>
					<p>And then dismissed the omen from her breast,</p>
					<p class="i2">Defying augury with that fond kiss;</p>
					<p>And no doubt of all methods 't is the best:</p>
					<p class="i2">Some people prefer wine—'t is not amiss;</p>
					<p>I have tried both—so those who would a part take</p>
					<p>May choose between the headache and the heartache.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>One of the two, according to your choice,</p>
					<p class="i2">Woman or wine, you'll have to undergo;</p>
					<p>Both maladies are taxes on our joys:</p>
					<p class="i2">But which to choose, I really hardly know;</p>
					<p>And if I had to give a casting voice,</p>
					<p class="i2">For both sides I could many reasons show,</p>
					<p>And then decide, without great wrong to either,</p>
					<p>It were much better to have both than neither.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan and Haidée gazed upon each other</p>
					<p class="i2">With swimming looks of speechless tenderness,</p>
					<p>Which mixed all feelings—friend, child, lover, brother—</p>
					<p class="i2">All that the best can mingle and express</p>
					<p>When two pure hearts are poured in one another,</p>
					<p class="i2">And love too much, and yet can not love less;</p>
					<p>But almost sanctify the sweet excess</p>
					<p>By the immortal wish and power to bless.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Mixed in each other's arms, and heart in heart,</p>
					<p class="i2">Why did they not then die?—they had lived too long</p>
					<p>Should an hour come to bid them breathe apart;</p>
					<p class="i2">Years could but bring them cruel things or wrong;</p>
					<p>The World was not for them—nor the World's art</p>
					<p class="i2">For beings passionate as Sappho's song;</p>
					<p>Love was born <i>with</i> them, <i>in</i> them, so intense,</p>
					<p>It was their very Spirit—not a sense.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They should have lived together deep in woods,</p>
					<p class="i2">Unseen as sings the nightingale;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_239">[239]</a> they were</p>
					<p>Unfit to mix in these thick solitudes</p>
					<p class="i2">Called social, haunts of Hate, and Vice, and Care:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DN">[DN]</a></p>
					<p>How lonely every freeborn creature broods!</p>
					<p class="i2">The sweetest song-birds nestle in a pair;</p>
					<p>The eagle soars alone; the gull and crow</p>
					<p>Flock o'er their carrion, just like men below.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now pillowed cheek to cheek, in loving sleep,</p>
					<p class="i2">Haidée and Juan their siesta took,</p>
					<p>A gentle slumber, but it was not deep,</p>
					<p class="i2">For ever and anon a something shook</p>
					<p>Juan, and shuddering o'er his frame would creep;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Haidée's sweet lips murmured like a brook</p>
					<p>A wordless music, and her face so fair</p>
					<p>Stirred with her dream, as rose-leaves with the air.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DO">[DO]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Or as the stirring of a deep clear stream</p>
					<p class="i2">Within an Alpine hollow, when the wind</p>
					<p>Walks o'er it, was she shaken by the dream,</p>
					<p class="i2">The mystical Usurper of the mind—</p>
					<p>O'erpowering us to be whate'er may seem</p>
					<p class="i2">Good to the soul which we no more can bind;</p>
					<p>Strange state of being! (for 't is still to be)</p>
					<p>Senseless to feel, and with sealed eyes to see.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DP">[DP]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She dreamed of being alone on the sea-shore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Chained to a rock; she knew not how, but stir</p>
					<p>She could not from the spot, and the loud roar</p>
					<p class="i2">Grew, and each wave rose roughly, threatening her;</p>
					<p>And o'er her upper lip they seemed to pour,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until she sobbed for breath, and soon they were</p>
					<p>Foaming o'er her lone head, so fierce and high—</p>
					<p>Each broke to drown her, yet she could not die.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Anon—she was released, and then she strayed</p>
					<p class="i2">O'er the sharp shingles with her bleeding feet,</p>
					<p>And stumbled almost every step she made:</p>
					<p class="i2">And something rolled before her in a sheet,</p>
					<p>Which she must still pursue howe'er afraid:</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was white and indistinct, nor stopped to meet</p>
					<p>Her glance nor grasp, for still she gazed and grasped,</p>
					<p>And ran, but it escaped her as she clasped.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The dream changed:—in a cave<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_240">[240]</a> she stood, its walls</p>
					<p class="i2">Were hung with marble icicles; the work</p>
					<p>Of ages on its water-fretted halls,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where waves might wash, and seals might breed and lurk;</p>
					<p>Her hair was dripping, and the very balls</p>
					<p class="i2">Of her black eyes seemed turned to tears, and mirk</p>
					<p>The sharp rocks looked below each drop they caught,</p>
					<p>Which froze to marble as it fell,—she thought.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DQ">[DQ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And wet, and cold, and lifeless at her feet,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pale as the foam that frothed on his dead brow,</p>
					<p>Which she essayed in vain to clear, (how sweet</p>
					<p class="i2">Were once her cares, how idle seemed they now!)</p>
					<p>Lay Juan, nor could aught renew the beat</p>
					<p class="i2">Of his quenched heart: and the sea dirges low</p>
					<p>Rang in her sad ears like a Mermaid's song,</p>
					<p>And that brief dream appeared a life too long.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And gazing on the dead, she thought his face</p>
					<p class="i2">Faded, or altered into something new—</p>
					<p>Like to her Father's features, till each trace</p>
					<p class="i2">More like and like to Lambro's aspect grew—</p>
					<p>With all his keen worn look and Grecian grace;</p>
					<p class="i2">And starting, she awoke, and what to view?</p>
					<p>Oh! Powers of Heaven! what dark eye meets she there?</p>
					<p>'T is—'t is her Father's—fixed upon the pair!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then shrieking, she arose, and shrieking fell,</p>
					<p class="i2">With joy and sorrow, hope and fear, to see</p>
					<p>Him whom she deemed a habitant where dwell</p>
					<p class="i2">The ocean-buried, risen from death, to be</p>
					<p>Perchance the death of one she loved too well:</p>
					<p class="i2">Dear as her father had been to Haidée,</p>
					<p>It was a moment of that awful kind—</p>
					<p>I have seen such—but must not call to mind.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Up Juan sprang to Haidée's bitter shriek,</p>
					<p class="i2">And caught her falling, and from off the wall</p>
					<p>Snatched down his sabre, in hot haste to wreak</p>
					<p class="i2">Vengeance on him who was the cause of all:</p>
					<p>Then Lambro, who till now forbore to speak,</p>
					<p class="i2">Smiled scornfully, and said, "Within my call,</p>
					<p>A thousand scimitars await the word;</p>
					<p>Put up, young man, put up your silly sword."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Haidée clung around him; "Juan, 't is—</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is Lambro—'t is my father! Kneel with me—</p>
					<p>He will forgive us—yes—it must be—yes.</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh! dearest father, in this agony</p>
					<p>Of pleasure and of pain—even while I kiss</p>
					<p class="i2">Thy garment's hem with transport, can it be</p>
					<p>That doubt should mingle with my filial joy?</p>
					<p>Deal with me as thou wilt, but spare this boy."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>High and inscrutable the old man stood,</p>
					<p class="i2">Calm in his voice, and calm within his eye—</p>
					<p>Not always signs with him of calmest mood:</p>
					<p class="i2">He looked upon her, but gave no reply;</p>
					<p>Then turned to Juan, in whose cheek the blood</p>
					<p class="i2">Oft came and went, as there resolved to die;</p>
					<p>In arms, at least, he stood, in act to spring</p>
					<p>On the first foe whom Lambro's call might bring.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Young man, your sword;" so Lambro once more said:</p>
					<p class="i2">Juan replied, "Not while this arm is free."</p>
					<p>The old man's cheek grew pale, but not with dread,</p>
					<p class="i2">And drawing from his belt a pistol he</p>
					<p>Replied, "Your blood be then on your own head."</p>
					<p class="i2">Then looked close at the flint, as if to see</p>
					<p>'T was fresh—for he had lately used the lock—</p>
					<p>And next proceeded quietly to cock.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It has a strange quick jar upon the ear,</p>
					<p class="i2">That cocking of a pistol, when you know</p>
					<p>A moment more will bring the sight to bear</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon your person, twelve yards off, or so;</p>
					<p>A gentlemanly distance, not too near,</p>
					<p class="i2">If you have got a former friend for foe;</p>
					<p>But after being fired at once or twice,</p>
					<p>The ear becomes more Irish, and less nice.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lambro presented, and one instant more</p>
					<p class="i2">Had stopped this Canto, and Don Juan's breath,</p>
					<p>When Haidée threw herself her boy before;</p>
					<p class="i2">Stern as her sire: "On me," she cried, "let Death</p>
					<p>Descend—the fault is mine; this fatal shore</p>
					<p class="i2">He found—but sought not. I have pledged my faith;</p>
					<p>I love him—I will die with him: I knew</p>
					<p>Your nature's firmness—know your daughter's too."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A minute past, and she had been all tears,</p>
					<p class="i2">And tenderness, and infancy; but now</p>
					<p>She stood as one who championed human fears—</p>
					<p class="i2">Pale, statue-like, and stern, she wooed the blow;</p>
					<p>And tall beyond her sex, and their compeers,</p>
					<p class="i2">She drew up to her height, as if to show</p>
					<p>A fairer mark; and with a fixed eye scanned</p>
					<p>Her Father's face—but never stopped his hand.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He gazed on her, and she on him; 't was strange</p>
					<p class="i2">How like they looked! the expression was the same;</p>
					<p>Serenely savage, with a little change</p>
					<p class="i2">In the large dark eye's mutual-darted flame;</p>
					<p>For she, too, was as one who could avenge,</p>
					<p class="i2">If cause should be—a Lioness, though tame.</p>
					<p>Her Father's blood before her Father's face</p>
					<p>Boiled up, and proved her truly of his race.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I said they were alike, their features and</p>
					<p class="i2">Their stature, differing but in sex and years;</p>
					<p>Even to the delicacy of their hand<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_241">[241]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">There was resemblance, such as true blood wears;</p>
					<p>And now to see them, thus divided, stand</p>
					<p class="i2">In fixed ferocity, when joyous tears</p>
					<p>And sweet sensations should have welcomed both,</p>
					<p>Shows what the passions are in their full growth.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The father paused a moment, then withdrew</p>
					<p class="i2">His weapon, and replaced it; but stood still,</p>
					<p>And looking on her, as to look her through,</p>
					<p class="i2">"Not <i>I</i>," he said, "have sought this stranger's ill;</p>
					<p>Not <i>I</i> have made this desolation: few</p>
					<p class="i2">Would bear such outrage, and forbear to kill;</p>
					<p>But I must do my duty—how thou hast</p>
					<p>Done thine, the present vouches for the past.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DR">[DR]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Let him disarm; or, by my father's head,</p>
					<p class="i2">His own shall roll before you like a ball!"</p>
					<p>He raised his whistle, as the word he said,</p>
					<p class="i2">And blew; another answered to the call,</p>
					<p>And rushing in disorderly, though led,</p>
					<p class="i2">And armed from boot to turban, one and all,</p>
					<p>Some twenty of his train came, rank on rank;</p>
					<p>He gave the word,—"Arrest or slay the Frank."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then, with a sudden movement, he withdrew</p>
					<p class="i2">His daughter; while compressed within his clasp,</p>
					<p>Twixt her and Juan interposed the crew;</p>
					<p class="i2">In vain she struggled in her father's grasp—</p>
					<p>His arms were like a serpent's coil: then flew</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon their prey, as darts an angry asp,</p>
					<p>The file of pirates—save the foremost, who</p>
					<p>Had fallen, with his right shoulder half cut through.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The second had his cheek laid open; but</p>
					<p class="i2">The third, a wary, cool old sworder, took</p>
					<p>The blows upon his cutlass, and then put</p>
					<p class="i2">His own well in; so well, ere you could look,</p>
					<p>His man was floored, and helpless at his foot,</p>
					<p class="i2">With the blood running like a little brook</p>
					<p>From two smart sabre gashes, deep and red—</p>
					<p>One on the arm, the other on the head.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then they bound him where he fell, and bore</p>
					<p class="i2">Juan from the apartment: with a sign</p>
					<p>Old Lambro bade them take him to the shore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where lay some ships which were to sail at nine.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DS">[DS]</a></p>
					<p>They laid him in a boat, and plied the oar</p>
					<p class="i2">Until they reached some galliots, placed in line;</p>
					<p>On board of one of these, and under hatches,</p>
					<p>They stowed him, with strict orders to the watches.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The world is full of strange vicissitudes,</p>
					<p class="i2">And here was one exceedingly unpleasant:</p>
					<p>A gentleman so rich in the world's goods,</p>
					<p class="i2">Handsome and young, enjoying all the present,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DT">[DT]</a></p>
					<p>Just at the very time when he least broods</p>
					<p class="i2">On such a thing, is suddenly to sea sent,</p>
					<p>Wounded and chained, so that he cannot move,</p>
					<p>And all because a lady fell in love.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here I must leave him, for I grow pathetic,</p>
					<p class="i2">Moved by the Chinese nymph of tears, green tea!</p>
					<p>Than whom Cassandra was not more prophetic;</p>
					<p class="i2">For if my pure libations exceed three,</p>
					<p>I feel my heart become so sympathetic,</p>
					<p class="i2">That I must have recourse to black Bohea:</p>
					<p>'T is pity wine should be so deleterious,</p>
					<p>For tea and coffee leave us much more serious,</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Unless when qualified with thee, Cogniac!</p>
					<p class="i2">Sweet Naïad of the Phlegethontic rill!</p>
					<p>Ah! why the liver wilt thou thus attack,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DU">[DU]</a>—</p>
					<p class="i2">And make, like other nymphs, thy lovers ill?</p>
					<p>I would take refuge in weak punch, but <i>rack</i></p>
					<p class="i2">(In each sense of the word), whene'er I fill</p>
					<p>My mild and midnight beakers to the brim,</p>
					<p>Wakes me next morning with its synonym.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_242">[242]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I leave Don Juan for the present, safe—</p>
					<p class="i2">Not sound, poor fellow, but severely wounded;</p>
					<p>Yet could his corporal pangs amount to half</p>
					<p class="i2">Of those with which his Haidée's bosom bounded?</p>
					<p>She was not one to weep, and rave, and chafe,</p>
					<p class="i2">And then give way, subdued because surrounded;</p>
					<p>Her mother was a Moorish maid from Fez,</p>
					<p>Where all is Eden, or a wilderness.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There the large olive rains its amber store</p>
					<p class="i2">In marble fonts; there grain, and flower, and fruit,</p>
					<p>Gush from the earth until the land runs o'er;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_243">[243]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But there, too, many a poison-tree has root,</p>
					<p>And Midnight listens to the lion's roar,</p>
					<p class="i2">And long, long deserts scorch the camel's foot,</p>
					<p>Or heaving whelm the helpless caravan;</p>
					<p>And as the soil is, so the heart of man.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Afric is all the Sun's, and as her earth</p>
					<p class="i2">Her human clay is kindled; full of power</p>
					<p>For good or evil, burning from its birth,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Moorish blood partakes the planet's hour,</p>
					<p>And like the soil beneath it will bring forth:</p>
					<p class="i2">Beauty and love were Haidée's mother's dower;</p>
					<p>But her large dark eye showed deep Passion's force,</p>
					<p>Though sleeping like a lion near a source.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DV">[DV]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her daughter, tempered with a milder ray,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like summer clouds all silvery, smooth, and fair,</p>
					<p>Till slowly charged with thunder they display</p>
					<p class="i2">Terror to earth, and tempest to the air,</p>
					<p>Had held till now her soft and milky way;</p>
					<p class="i2">But overwrought with Passion and Despair,</p>
					<p>The fire burst forth from her Numidian veins,</p>
					<p>Even as the Simoom<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_244">[244]</a> sweeps the blasted plains.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The last sight which she saw was Juan's gore,</p>
					<p class="i2">And he himself o'ermastered and cut down;</p>
					<p>His blood was running on the very floor</p>
					<p class="i2">Where late he trod, her beautiful, her own;</p>
					<p>Thus much she viewed an instant and no more,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Her struggles ceased with one convulsive groan;</p>
					<p>On her Sire's arm, which until now scarce held</p>
					<p>Her writhing, fell she like a cedar felled.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A vein had burst, and her sweet lips' pure dyes<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DW">[DW]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Were dabbled with the deep blood which ran o'er;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_245">[245]</a></p>
					<p>And her head drooped, as when the lily lies</p>
					<p class="i2">O'ercharged with rain: her summoned handmaids bore</p>
					<p>Their lady to her couch with gushing eyes;</p>
					<p class="i2">Of herbs and cordials they produced their store,</p>
					<p>But she defied all means they could employ,</p>
					<p>Like one Life could not hold, nor Death destroy.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Days lay she in that state unchanged, though chill—</p>
					<p class="i2">With nothing livid, still her lips were red;</p>
					<p>She had no pulse, but Death seemed absent still;</p>
					<p class="i2">No hideous sign proclaimed her surely dead;</p>
					<p>Corruption came not in each mind to kill</p>
					<p class="i2">All hope; to look upon her sweet face bred</p>
					<p>New thoughts of Life, for it seemed full of soul—</p>
					<p>She had so much, Earth could not claim the whole.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The ruling passion, such as marble shows</p>
					<p class="i2">When exquisitely chiselled, still lay there,</p>
					<p>But fixed as marble's unchanged aspect throws</p>
					<p class="i2">O'er the fair Venus, but for ever fair;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_246">[246]</a></p>
					<p>O'er the Laocoon's all eternal throes,</p>
					<p class="i2">And ever-dying Gladiator's air,</p>
					<p>Their energy like life forms all their fame,</p>
					<p>Yet looks not life, for they are still the same.—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DX">[DX]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She woke at length, but not as sleepers wake,</p>
					<p class="i2">Rather the dead, for Life seemed something new,</p>
					<p>A strange sensation which she must partake</p>
					<p class="i2">Perforce, since whatsoever met her view</p>
					<p>Struck not on memory, though a heavy ache</p>
					<p class="i2">Lay at her heart, whose earliest beat still true</p>
					<p>Brought back the sense of pain without the cause,</p>
					<p>For, for a while, the Furies made a pause.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She looked on many a face with vacant eye,</p>
					<p class="i2">On many a token without knowing what:</p>
					<p>She saw them watch her without asking why,</p>
					<p class="i2">And recked not who around her pillow sat;</p>
					<p>Not speechless, though she spoke not—not a sigh</p>
					<p class="i2">Relieved her thoughts—dull silence and quick chat</p>
					<p>Were tried in vain by those who served; she gave</p>
					<p>No sign, save breath, of having left the grave.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her handmaids tended, but she heeded not;</p>
					<p class="i2">Her Father watched, she turned her eyes away;</p>
					<p>She recognised no being, and no spot,</p>
					<p class="i2">However dear or cherished in their day;</p>
					<p>They changed from room to room—but all forgot—</p>
					<p class="i2">Gentle, but without memory she lay;</p>
					<p>At length those eyes, which they would fain be weaning</p>
					<p>Back to old thoughts, waxed full of fearful meaning.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then a slave bethought her of a harp;</p>
					<p class="i2">The harper came, and tuned his instrument;</p>
					<p>At the first notes, irregular and sharp,</p>
					<p class="i2">On him her flashing eyes a moment bent,</p>
					<p>Then to the wall she turned as if to warp</p>
					<p class="i2">Her thoughts from sorrow through her heart re-sent;</p>
					<p>And he began a long low island-song</p>
					<p>Of ancient days, ere Tyranny grew strong.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Anon her thin wan fingers beat the wall</p>
					<p class="i2">In time to his old tune: he changed the theme,</p>
					<p>And sung of Love; the fierce name struck through all</p>
					<p class="i2">Her recollection; on her flashed the dream</p>
					<p>Of what she was, and is, if ye could call</p>
					<p class="i2">To be so being; in a gushing stream</p>
					<p>The tears rushed forth from her o'erclouded brain,</p>
					<p>Like mountain mists at length dissolved in rain.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Short solace, vain relief!—Thought came too quick,</p>
					<p class="i2">And whirled her brain to madness; she arose</p>
					<p>As one who ne'er had dwelt among the sick,</p>
					<p class="i2">And flew at all she met, as on her foes;</p>
					<p>But no one ever heard her speak or shriek,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although her paroxysm drew towards its close;—</p>
					<p>Hers was a frenzy which disdained to rave,</p>
					<p>Even when they smote her, in the hope to save.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet she betrayed at times a gleam of sense;</p>
					<p class="i2">Nothing could make her meet her Father's face,</p>
					<p>Though on all other things with looks intense</p>
					<p class="i2">She gazed, but none she ever could retrace;</p>
					<p>Food she refused, and raiment; no pretence</p>
					<p class="i2">Availed for either; neither change of place,</p>
					<p>Nor time, nor skill, nor remedy, could give her</p>
					<p>Senses to sleep—the power seemed gone for ever.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Twelve days and nights she withered thus; at last,</p>
					<p class="i2">Without a groan, or sigh, or glance, to show</p>
					<p>A parting pang, the spirit from her passed:</p>
					<p class="i2">And they who watched her nearest could not know</p>
					<p>The very instant, till the change that cast</p>
					<p class="i2">Her sweet face into shadow, dull and slow,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DY">[DY]</a></p>
					<p>Glazed o'er her eyes—the beautiful, the black—</p>
					<p>Oh! to possess such lustre—and then lack!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She died, but not alone; she held, within,</p>
					<p class="i2">A second principle of Life, which might</p>
					<p>Have dawned a fair and sinless child of sin;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_DZ">[DZ]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But closed its little being without light,</p>
					<p>And went down to the grave unborn, wherein</p>
					<p class="i2">Blossom and bough lie withered with one blight;</p>
					<p>In vain the dews of Heaven descend above</p>
					<p>The bleeding flower and blasted fruit of Love.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus lived—thus died she; never more on her</p>
					<p class="i2">Shall Sorrow light, or Shame. She was not made</p>
					<p>Through years or moons the inner weight to bear,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which colder hearts endure till they are laid</p>
					<p>By age in earth: her days and pleasures were</p>
					<p class="i2">Brief, but delightful—such as had not staid</p>
					<p>Long with her destiny; but she sleeps well<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_247">[247]</a></p>
					<p>By the sea-shore, whereon she loved to dwell.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>That isle is now all desolate and bare,</p>
					<p class="i2">Its dwellings down, its tenants passed away;</p>
					<p>None but her own and Father's grave is there,</p>
					<p class="i2">And nothing outward tells of human clay;</p>
					<p>Ye could not know where lies a thing so fair,</p>
					<p class="i2">No stone is there to show, no tongue to say,</p>
					<p>What was; no dirge, except the hollow sea's,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EA">[EA]</a></p>
					<p>Mourns o'er the beauty of the Cyclades.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But many a Greek maid in a loving song</p>
					<p class="i2">Sighs o'er her name; and many an islander</p>
					<p>With her Sire's story makes the night less long;</p>
					<p class="i2">Valour was his, and Beauty dwelt with her:</p>
					<p>If she loved rashly, her life paid for wrong—</p>
					<p class="i2">A heavy price must all pay who thus err,</p>
					<p>In some shape; let none think to fly the danger,</p>
					<p>For soon or late Love is his own avenger.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But let me change this theme, which grows too sad,</p>
					<p class="i2">And lay this sheet of sorrows on the shelf;</p>
					<p>I don't much like describing people mad,</p>
					<p class="i2">For fear of seeming rather touched myself—</p>
					<p>Besides, I've no more on this head to add;</p>
					<p class="i2">And as my Muse is a capricious elf,</p>
					<p>We'll put about, and try another tack</p>
					<p>With Juan, left half-killed some stanzas back.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Wounded and fettered, "cabined, cribbed, confined,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_248">[248]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Some days and nights elapsed before that he</p>
					<p>Could altogether call the past to mind;</p>
					<p class="i2">And when he did, he found himself at sea,</p>
					<p>Sailing six knots an hour before the wind;</p>
					<p class="i2">The shores of Ilion lay beneath their lee—</p>
					<p>Another time he might have liked to see 'em,</p>
					<p>But now was not much pleased with Cape Sigeum.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There, on the green and village-cotted hill, is</p>
					<p class="i2">(Flanked by the Hellespont, and by the sea)</p>
					<p>Entombed the bravest of the brave, Achilles;</p>
					<p class="i2">They say so—(Bryant<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_249">[249]</a> says the contrary):</p>
					<p>And further downward, tall and towering still, is</p>
					<p class="i2">The tumulus—of whom? Heaven knows! 't may be</p>
					<p>Patroclus, Ajax, or Protesilaus—</p>
					<p>All heroes, who if living still would slay us.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EB">[EB]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>High barrows, without marble, or a name,</p>
					<p class="i2">A vast, untilled, and mountain-skirted plain,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EC">[EC]</a></p>
					<p>And Ida in the distance, still the same,</p>
					<p class="i2">And old Scamander (if 't is he) remain;</p>
					<p>The situation seems still formed for fame—</p>
					<p class="i2">A hundred thousand men might fight again,</p>
					<p>With ease; but where I sought for Ilion's walls,</p>
					<p>The quiet sheep feeds, and the tortoise<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_250">[250]</a> crawls;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_ED">[ED]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Troops of untended horses; here and there</p>
					<p class="i2">Some little hamlets, with new names uncouth;</p>
					<p>Some shepherds (unlike Paris) led to stare</p>
					<p class="i2">A moment at the European youth</p>
					<p>Whom to the spot their school-boy feelings bear;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EE">[EE]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A Turk, with beads in hand, and pipe in mouth,</p>
					<p>Extremely taken with his own religion,</p>
					<p>Are what I found there—but the devil a Phrygian.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan, here permitted to emerge</p>
					<p class="i2">From his dull cabin, found himself a slave;</p>
					<p>Forlorn, and gazing on the deep blue surge,</p>
					<p class="i2">O'ershadowed there by many a Hero's grave;</p>
					<p>Weak still with loss of blood, he scarce could urge</p>
					<p class="i2">A few brief questions; and the answers gave</p>
					<p>No very satisfactory information</p>
					<p>About his past or present situation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He saw some fellow captives, who appeared</p>
					<p class="i2">To be Italians (as they were in fact)—</p>
					<p>From them, at least, <i>their</i> destiny he heard,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which was an odd one; a troop going to act</p>
					<p>In Sicily—all singers, duly reared</p>
					<p class="i2">In their vocation, had not been attacked</p>
					<p>In sailing from Livorno by the pirate,</p>
					<p>But sold by the <i>impresario</i> at no high rate.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_251">[251]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>By one of these, the <i>buffo</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_252">[252]</a> of the party,</p>
					<p class="i2">Juan was told about their curious case;</p>
					<p>For although destined to the Turkish mart, he</p>
					<p class="i2">Still kept his spirits up—at least his face;</p>
					<p>The little fellow really looked quite hearty,</p>
					<p class="i2">And bore him with some gaiety and grace,</p>
					<p>Showing a much more reconciled demeanour,</p>
					<p>Than did the prima donna and the tenor.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In a few words he told their hapless story,</p>
					<p class="i2">Saying, "Our Machiavelian <i>impresario</i>,</p>
					<p>Making a signal off some promontory,</p>
					<p class="i2">Hailed a strange brig—<i>Corpo di Caio Mario!</i></p>
					<p>We were transferred on board her in a hurry,</p>
					<p class="i2">Without a single scudo of <i>salario</i>;</p>
					<p>But if the Sultan has a taste for song,</p>
					<p>We will revive our fortunes before long.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"The prima donna, though a little old,</p>
					<p class="i2">And haggard with a dissipated life,</p>
					<p>And subject, when the house is thin, to cold,</p>
					<p class="i2">Has some good notes; and then the tenor's wife,</p>
					<p>With no great voice, is pleasing to behold;</p>
					<p class="i2">Last carnival she made a deal of strife,</p>
					<p>By carrying off Count Cesare Cicogna</p>
					<p>From an old Roman Princess at Bologna.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"And then there are the dancers; there's the Nini,</p>
					<p class="i2">With more than one profession gains by all;</p>
					<p>Then there's that laughing slut the Pelegrini,</p>
					<p class="i2">She, too, was fortunate last Carnival,</p>
					<p>And made at least five hundred good <i>zecchini</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">But spends so fast, she has not now a paul;</p>
					<p>And then there's the Grotesca—such a dancer!</p>
					<p>Where men have souls or bodies she must answer.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"As for the <i>figuranti</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_253">[253]</a> they are like</p>
					<p class="i2">The rest of all that tribe; with here and there</p>
					<p>A pretty person, which perhaps may strike—</p>
					<p class="i2">The rest are hardly fitted for a fair;</p>
					<p>There's one, though tall and stiffer than a pike,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet has a sentimental kind of air</p>
					<p>Which might go far, but she don't dance with vigour—</p>
					<p>The more's the pity, with her face and figure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"As for the men, they are a middling set;</p>
					<p class="i2">The <i>musico</i> is but a cracked old basin,</p>
					<p>But, being qualified in one way yet,</p>
					<p class="i2">May the seraglio do to set his face in,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EF">[EF]</a></p>
					<p>And as a servant some preferment get;</p>
					<p class="i2">His singing I no further trust can place in:</p>
					<p>From all the Pope<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_254">[254]</a> makes yearly 't would perplex</p>
					<p>To find three perfect pipes of the <i>third</i> sex.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"The tenor's voice is spoilt by affectation;</p>
					<p class="i2">And for the bass, the beast can only bellow—</p>
					<p>In fact, he had no singing education,</p>
					<p class="i2">An ignorant, noteless, timeless, tuneless fellow;</p>
					<p>But being the prima donna's near relation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who swore his voice was very rich and mellow,</p>
					<p>They hired him, though to hear him you'd believe</p>
					<p>An ass was practising recitative.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"'T would not become myself to dwell upon</p>
					<p class="i2">My own merits, and though young—I see, Sir—you</p>
					<p>Have got a travelled air, which speaks you one</p>
					<p class="i2">To whom the opera is by no means new:</p>
					<p>You've heard of Raucocanti?—I'm the man;</p>
					<p class="i2">The time may come when you may hear me too;</p>
					<p>You was<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_255">[255]</a> not last year at the fair of Lugo,</p>
					<p>But next, when I'm engaged to sing there—do go.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Our baritone I almost had forgot,</p>
					<p class="i2">A pretty lad, but bursting with conceit;</p>
					<p>With graceful action, science not a jot,</p>
					<p class="i2">A voice of no great compass, and not sweet,</p>
					<p>He always is complaining of his lot,</p>
					<p class="i2">Forsooth, scarce fit for ballads in the street;</p>
					<p>In lovers' parts his passion more to breathe,</p>
					<p>Having no heart to show, he shows his teeth."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EG">[EG]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here Raucocanti's eloquent recital</p>
					<p class="i2">Was interrupted by the pirate crew,</p>
					<p>Who came at stated moments to invite all</p>
					<p class="i2">The captives back to their sad berths; each threw</p>
					<p>A rueful glance upon the waves, (which bright all</p>
					<p class="i2">From the blue skies derived a double blue,</p>
					<p>Dancing all free and happy in the sun,)</p>
					<p>And then went down the hatchway one by one.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They heard next day—that in the Dardanelles,</p>
					<p class="i2">Waiting for his Sublimity's firman,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_256">[256]</a></p>
					<p>The most imperative of sovereign spells,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which everybody does without who can,</p>
					<p>More to secure them in their naval cells,</p>
					<p class="i2">Lady to lady, well as man to man,</p>
					<p>Were to be chained and lotted out per couple,</p>
					<p>For the slave market of Constantinople.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It seems when this allotment was made out,</p>
					<p class="i2">There chanced to be an odd male, and odd female,</p>
					<p>Who (after some discussion and some doubt,</p>
					<p class="i2">If the soprano might be deemed to be male,</p>
					<p>They placed him o'er the women as a scout)</p>
					<p class="i2">Were linked together, and it happened the male</p>
					<p>Was Juan,—who, an awkward thing at his age,</p>
					<p>Paired off with a Bacchante blooming visage.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With Raucocanti lucklessly was chained</p>
					<p class="i2">The tenor; these two hated with a hate</p>
					<p>Found only on the stage, and each more pained</p>
					<p class="i2">With this his tuneful neighbour than his fate;</p>
					<p>Sad strife arose, for they were so cross-grained,</p>
					<p class="i2">Instead of bearing up without debate,</p>
					<p>That each pulled different ways with many an oath,</p>
					<p>"Arcades ambo," <i>id est</i>—blackguards both.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EH">[EH]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan's companion was a Romagnole,</p>
					<p class="i2">But bred within the march of old Ancona,</p>
					<p>With eyes that looked into the very soul</p>
					<p class="i2">(And other chief points of a <i>bella donna</i>),</p>
					<p>Bright—and as black and burning as a coal;</p>
					<p class="i2">And through her clear brunette complexion shone a</p>
					<p>Great wish to please—a most attractive dower,</p>
					<p>Especially when added to the power.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But all that power was wasted upon him,</p>
					<p class="i2">For Sorrow o'er each sense held stern command;</p>
					<p>Her eye might flash on his, but found it dim:</p>
					<p class="i2">And though thus chained, as natural her hand</p>
					<p>Touched his, nor that—nor any handsome limb</p>
					<p class="i2">(And she had some not easy to withstand)</p>
					<p>Could stir his pulse, or make his faith feel brittle;</p>
					<p>Perhaps his recent wounds might help a little.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No matter; we should ne'er too much inquire,</p>
					<p class="i2">But facts are facts: no Knight could be more true,</p>
					<p>And firmer faith no Ladye-love desire;</p>
					<p class="i2">We will omit the proofs, save one or two:</p>
					<p>'T is said no one in hand "can hold a fire</p>
					<p class="i2">By thought of frosty Caucasus"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_257">[257]</a>—but few,</p>
					<p>I really think—yet Juan's then ordeal</p>
					<p>Was more triumphant, and not much less real.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here I might enter on a chaste description,</p>
					<p class="i2">Having withstood temptation in my youth,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EI">[EI]</a></p>
					<p>But hear that several people take exception</p>
					<p class="i2">At the first two books having too much truth;</p>
					<p>Therefore I'll make Don Juan leave the ship soon,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because the publisher declares, in sooth,</p>
					<p>Through needles' eyes it easier for the camel is</p>
					<p>To pass, than those two cantos into families.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is all the same to me; I'm fond of yielding,</p>
					<p class="i2">And therefore leave them to the purer page</p>
					<p>Of Smollett, Prior, Ariosto, Fielding,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who say strange things for so correct an age;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_258">[258]</a></p>
					<p>I once had great alacrity in wielding</p>
					<p class="i2">My pen, and liked poetic war to wage,</p>
					<p>And recollect the time when all this cant</p>
					<p>Would have provoked remarks—which now it shan't.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>As boys love rows, my boyhood liked a squabble;</p>
					<p class="i2">But at this hour I wish to part in peace,</p>
					<p>Leaving such to the literary rabble;</p>
					<p class="i2">Whether my verse's fame be doomed to cease</p>
					<p>While the right hand which wrote it still is able,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or of some centuries to take a lease,</p>
					<p>The grass upon my grave will grow as long,</p>
					<p>And sigh to midnight winds, but not to song.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>C.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of poets who come down to us through distance</p>
					<p class="i2">Of time and tongues, the foster-babes of Fame,</p>
					<p>Life seems the smallest portion of existence;</p>
					<p class="i2">Where twenty ages gather o'er a name,</p>
					<p>'T is as a snowball which derives assistance</p>
					<p class="i2">From every flake, and yet rolls on the same,</p>
					<p>Even till an iceberg it may chance to grow;</p>
					<p>But, after all, 't is nothing but cold snow.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And so great names are nothing more than nominal,</p>
					<p class="i2">And love of Glory's but an airy lust,</p>
					<p>Too often in its fury overcoming all</p>
					<p class="i2">Who would as 't were identify their dust</p>
					<p>From out the wide destruction, which, entombing all,</p>
					<p class="i2">Leaves nothing till "the coming of the just"—</p>
					<p>Save change: I've stood upon Achilles' tomb,</p>
					<p>And heard Troy doubted;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_259">[259]</a> Time will doubt of Rome.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The very generations of the dead</p>
					<p class="i2">Are swept away, and tomb inherits tomb,</p>
					<p>Until the memory of an Age is fled,</p>
					<p class="i2">And, buried, sinks beneath its offspring's doom:</p>
					<p>Where are the epitaphs our fathers read?</p>
					<p class="i2">Save a few gleaned from the sepulchral gloom</p>
					<p>Which once-named myriads nameless lie beneath,</p>
					<p>And lose their own in universal Death.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I canter by the spot each afternoon</p>
					<p class="i2">Where perished in his fame the hero-boy,</p>
					<p>Who lived too long for men, but died too soon</p>
					<p class="i2">For human vanity, the young De Foix!</p>
					<p>A broken pillar, not uncouthly hewn,</p>
					<p class="i2">But which Neglect is hastening to destroy,</p>
					<p>Records Ravenna's carnage on its face,</p>
					<p>While weeds and ordure rankle round the base.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_260">[260]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I pass each day where Dante's bones are laid:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_261">[261]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A little cupola, more neat than solemn,</p>
					<p>Protects his dust, but reverence here is paid<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EJ">[EJ]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">To the Bard's tomb, and not the Warrior's column:</p>
					<p>The time must come, when both alike decayed,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Chieftain's trophy, and the Poet's volume,</p>
					<p>Will sink where lie the songs and wars of earth,</p>
					<p>Before Pelides' death, or Homer's birth.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With human blood that column was cemented,</p>
					<p class="i2">With human filth that column is defiled,</p>
					<p>As if the peasant's coarse contempt were vented</p>
					<p class="i2">To show his loathing of the spot he soiled:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EK">[EK]</a></p>
					<p>Thus is the trophy used, and thus lamented</p>
					<p class="i2">Should ever be those blood-hounds, from whose wild</p>
					<p>Instinct of gore and glory Earth has known</p>
					<p>Those sufferings Dante saw in Hell alone.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EL">[EL]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet there will still be bards: though Fame is smoke,</p>
					<p class="i2">Its fumes are frankincense to human thought;</p>
					<p>And the unquiet feelings, which first woke</p>
					<p class="i2">Song in the world, will seek what then they sought;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EM">[EM]</a></p>
					<p>As on the beach the waves at last are broke,</p>
					<p class="i2">Thus to their extreme verge the passions brought</p>
					<p>Dash into poetry, which is but Passion,</p>
					<p>Or, at least, was so ere it grew a fashion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If in the course of such a life as was</p>
					<p class="i2">At once adventurous and contemplative,</p>
					<p>Men who partake all passions as they pass,</p>
					<p class="i2">Acquire the deep and bitter power to give<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EN">[EN]</a></p>
					<p>Their images again as in a glass,</p>
					<p class="i2">And in such colours that they seem to live;</p>
					<p>You may do right forbidding them to show 'em,</p>
					<p>But spoil (I think) a very pretty poem.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_262">[262]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! ye, who make the fortunes of all books!</p>
					<p class="i2">Benign Ceruleans of the second sex!</p>
					<p>Who advertise new poems by your looks,</p>
					<p class="i2">Your "Imprimatur" will ye not annex?</p>
					<p>What! must I go to the oblivious cooks,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EO">[EO]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Those Cornish plunderers of Parnassian wrecks?</p>
					<p>Ah! must I then the only minstrel be,</p>
					<p>Proscribed from tasting your Castalian tea!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_263">[263]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What! can I prove "a lion" then no more?</p>
					<p class="i2">A ball-room bard, a foolscap, hot-press darling?</p>
					<p>To bear the compliments of many a bore,</p>
					<p class="i2">And sigh, "I can't get out," like Yorick's starling;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_264">[264]</a></p>
					<p>Why then I'll swear, as poet Wordy swore</p>
					<p class="i2">(Because the world won't read him, always snarling),</p>
					<p>That Taste is gone, that Fame is but a lottery,</p>
					<p>Drawn by the blue-coat misses of a coterie.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_265">[265]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! "darkly, deeply, beautifully blue,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_266">[266]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">As some one somewhere sings about the sky,</p>
					<p>And I, ye learnéd ladies, say of you;</p>
					<p class="i2">They say your stockings are so—(Heaven knows why,</p>
					<p>I have examined few pair of that hue);</p>
					<p class="i2">Blue as the garters which serenely lie</p>
					<p>Round the Patrician left-legs, which adorn</p>
					<p>The festal midnight, and the levee morn.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EP">[EP]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet some of you are most seraphic creatures—</p>
					<p class="i2">But times are altered since, a rhyming lover,</p>
					<p>You read my stanzas, and I read your features:</p>
					<p class="i2">And—but no matter, all those things are over;</p>
					<p>Still I have no dislike to learnéd natures,</p>
					<p class="i2">For sometimes such a world of virtues cover;</p>
					<p>I knew one woman of that purple school,</p>
					<p>The loveliest, chastest, best, but—quite a fool.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_267">[267]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Humboldt, "the first of travellers," but not</p>
					<p class="i2">The last, if late accounts be accurate,</p>
					<p>Invented, by some name I have forgot,</p>
					<p class="i2">As well as the sublime discovery's date,</p>
					<p>An airy instrument, with which he sought</p>
					<p class="i2">To ascertain the atmospheric state,</p>
					<p>By measuring "the <i>intensity of blue:</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_268">[268]</a></p>
					<p>Oh, Lady Daphne! let me measure you!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_EQ">[EQ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But to the narrative:—The vessel bound</p>
					<p class="i2">With slaves to sell off in the capital,</p>
					<p>After the usual process, might be found</p>
					<p class="i2">At anchor under the seraglio wall;</p>
					<p>Her cargo, from the plague being safe and sound,</p>
					<p class="i2">Were landed in the market,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_269">[269]</a> one and all;</p>
					<p>And, there, with Georgians, Russians, and Circassians,</p>
					<p>Bought up for different purposes and passions.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some went off dearly; fifteen hundred dollars</p>
					<p class="i2">For one Circassian, a sweet girl, were given,</p>
					<p>Warranted virgin; Beauty's brightest colours</p>
					<p class="i2">Had decked her out in all the hues of heaven:</p>
					<p>Her sale sent home some disappointed bawlers,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who bade on till the hundreds reached eleven;</p>
					<p>But when the offer went beyond, they knew</p>
					<p>'T was for the Sultan, and at once withdrew.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Twelve negresses from Nubia brought a price</p>
					<p class="i2">Which the West Indian market scarce could bring—</p>
					<p>Though Wilberforce, at last, has made it twice</p>
					<p class="i2">What 't was ere Abolition; and the thing</p>
					<p>Need not seem very wonderful, for Vice</p>
					<p class="i2">Is always much more splendid than a King:</p>
					<p>The Virtues, even the most exalted, Charity,</p>
					<p>Are saving—Vice spares nothing for a rarity.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But for the destiny of this young troop,</p>
					<p class="i2">How some were bought by Pachas, some by Jews,</p>
					<p>How some to burdens were obliged to stoop,</p>
					<p class="i2">And others rose to the command of crews</p>
					<p>As renegadoes; while in hapless group,</p>
					<p class="i2">Hoping no very old Vizier might choose,</p>
					<p>The females stood, as one by one they picked 'em,</p>
					<p>To make a mistress, or fourth wife, or victim:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_ER">[ER]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All this must be reserved for further song;</p>
					<p class="i2">Also our Hero's lot, howe'er unpleasant</p>
					<p>(Because this Canto has become too long),<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_ES">[ES]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Must be postponed discreetly for the present;</p>
					<p>I'm sensible redundancy is wrong,</p>
					<p class="i2">But could not for the Muse of me put less in 't:</p>
					<p>And now delay the progress of Don Juan,</p>
					<p>Till what is called in Ossian the fifth Duan.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="attrib">Written Nov. 1819. Copied January, 1820.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_230"><span class="label">[230]</span></a> {183}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down,</p>
							<p>Warring in Heaven against Heaven's matchless King."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Paradise Lost</i>, iv. 40, 41.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_231">
							<span class="label">[231]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Time hovers o'er, impatient to destroy,</p>
							<p>And shuts up all the passages of joy:</p>
							<p>In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,</p>
							<p>The fruit autumnal, and the vernal flow'r;</p>
							<p>With listless eyes the dotard views the store,</p>
							<p>He views, and wonders that they please no more."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Johnson's <i>Vanity of Human Wishes.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_232"><span class="label">[232]</span></a> {184}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i13">[" ... my May of Life</p>
							<p>Is fall'n into the sere, the yellow leaf."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 3, lines 22, 23.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DH"><span class="label">[DH]</span></a> <i>Itself to that fit apathy whose deed.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DI"><span class="label">[DI]</span></a> <i>First in the icy depths of Lethe's spring.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_233"><span class="label">[233]</span></a> [See "Introduction to the <i>Morgante Maggiore</i>," <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 280.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DJ"><span class="label">[DJ]</span></a> <i>Pulci being Father</i>—.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_234"><span class="label">[234]</span></a> {185} ["Cum canerem reges et prælia, Cynthius aurem Vellit, et admonuit." Virgil, <i>Ecl.</i> vi. lines 3, 4.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DK"><span class="label">[DK]</span></a> {186}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i13">—— <i>from its mother's knee</i></p>
							<p class="i2"><i>When its last weaning draught is drained for ever</i>,</p>
							<p><i>The child divided—it were less to see</i>,</p>
							<p><i>Than these two from each other torn apart</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_235"><span class="label">[235]</span></a> [See Herodotus (<i>Cleobis and Biton</i>), i. 31. The sentiment is in a fragment of Menander.<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 1em;" title="O(/n oi( theoi\ philou~sin a)pothnê/skei ne/os">Ὅν οἱ θεοὶ φιλοῦσιν ἀποθνήσκει νέος</span><br/>
					or<br/>
					<span style="margin-left: 1em;" title="O(/n ga\r philei~ theo\s  a)pothnê/skei ne/os.">Ὅν γὰρ φιλεῖ θεὸς  ἀποθνήσκει νέος.</span></p>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Menandri at Philomenis reliquiæ</i>, edidit Augustus Meineke, p. 48.</p>
					<p>See <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 22, note 1. Byron applied the saying to Allegra in a letter to Sir Walter Scott, dated May 4, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 57.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_236"><span class="label">[236]</span></a> [Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto II. stanza xcvi. line 7. Compare, too, Young's <i>Night Thoughts</i> ("The Complaint," Night I. ed. 1825, p. 5)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_237"><span class="label">[237]</span></a> {187}[Compare Swift's "little language" in his letter to Stella: <i>Podefar</i>, for instance, which is supposed to stand for "Poor dear foolish rogue," and Ppt., which meant "Poor pretty thing."—See <i>The Journal of Stella</i>, edited by G.A. Aitken, 1901, xxxv. note 1, and "Journal: March, 1710-11," 165, note 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DL">
							<span class="label">[DL]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>For theirs were buoyant spirits, which would bound</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>'Gainst common failings, etc</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_238"><span class="label">[238]</span></a> {188}[The reference may be to Coleridge's <i>Kubla Khan</i>, which, to Medwin's wonderment, "delighted" Byron (<i>Conversations</i>, 1824, p. 264). De Quincy's <i>Confessions of an English Opium Eater</i> appeared in the <i>London Magazine</i>, October, November, 1821, after Cantos III., IV., V., of <i>Don Juan</i> were published. But, perhaps, he was contrasting the "simpler blisses" of Juan and Haidée with Shelley's mystical affinities and divagations.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DM"><span class="label">[DM]</span></a> <i>—— had set their hearts a bleeding.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_239"><span class="label">[239]</span></a> {190}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["The shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,</p>
							<p>I better brook than flourishing peopled towns:</p>
							<p>There can I sit alone, unseen of any,</p>
							<p>And to the nightingale's complaining notes</p>
							<p>Tune my distresses, and record, my woes."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Two Gentlemen of Verona</i>, act v. sc. 4, lines 2-6.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DN"><span class="label">[DN]</span></a> {191}<i>Called social, where all Vice and Hatred are.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DO"><span class="label">[DO]</span></a> <i>Moved with her dream——.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DP">
							<span class="label">[DP]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Strange state of being!—for 't is still to be—</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>And who can know all false what then we see?</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_240"><span class="label">[240]</span></a> {192}[Compare the description of the "spacious cave," in <i>The Island</i>, Canto IV. lines 121, <i>sq., Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 629, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DQ"><span class="label">[DQ]</span></a>—— <i>methought</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_241"><span class="label">[241]</span></a> {195}[The reader will observe a curious mark of propinquity which the poet notices, with respect to the hands of the father and daughter. Lord Byron, we suspect, is indebted for the first hint of this to Ali Pacha, who, by the bye, is the original of Lambro; for, when his lordship was introduced, with his friend Hobhouse, to that agreeable mannered tyrant, the Vizier said that he knew he was the <i>Megalos Anthropos</i> (i.e. the great Man), by the smallness of his ears and hands.—Galt. See Byron's letter to his mother, November 12, 1809, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 251.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DR">
							<span class="label">[DR]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>And if</i> I <i>did my duty as</i> thou <i>hast</i>,</p>
							<p><i>This hour were thine, and thy young minions last</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DS"><span class="label">[DS]</span></a> {196}<i>Till further orders should his doom assign</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DT"><span class="label">[DT]</span></a> <i>Loving and loved</i>—.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DU"><span class="label">[DU]</span></a> {197}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2">
								<i>But thou, sweet fury of the fiery rill,</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>Makest on the liver a still worse attack;</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Besides, thy price is something dearer still</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_242"><span class="label">[242]</span></a> ["As squire Sullen says, '\My head aches consumedly,' 'Scrub, bring me a dram!' Drank some Imola wine, and some punch!"—<i>Extracts from a Diary</i>, February 25, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 209. For rack or "arrack" punch, see Thackeray's <i>Vanity Fair, A Novel without a Hero</i>, chap. vi. ed. 1892, p. 44.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_243"><span class="label">[243]</span></a> {198}["At Fas [Fez] the houses of the great and wealthy have, within-side, spacious courts, adorned with sumptuous galleries, fountains, basons of fine marble, and fish-ponds, shaded with orange, lemon, pomegranate, and fig trees, abounding with fruit, and ornamented with roses, hyacinths, jasmine, violets, and orange flowers, emitting a delectable fragrance."—<i>Account of the Empire of Marocco and Suez</i>, by James Grey Jackson, 1811, pp. 69, 70.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DV">
							<span class="label">[DV]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Beauty and Passion were the natural dower</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Of Haidée's mother, but her climate's force</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Lay at her heart, though sleeping at the source</i>.</p>
							<p>or, <i>But in her large eye lay deep Passion's force</i>,</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Like to a lion sleeping by a source</i>.</p>
							<p>or, <i>But in her large eye lay deep Passion's force</i>,</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>As sleeps a lion by a river's source</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_244"><span class="label">[244]</span></a> [Compare <i>Manfred</i>, act iii. sc. 1, line 128, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 125.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DW"><span class="label">[DW]</span></a> {199}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>The blood gushed from her lips, and ears, and eyes:</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Those eyes, so beautiful—beheld no more</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_245"><span class="label">[245]</span></a> This is no very uncommon effect of the violence of conflicting and different passions. The Doge Francis Foscari, on his deposition in 1457, hearing the bells of St. Mark announce the election of his successor, "mourut subitement d'une hémorragie causée par une veine qui s'éclata dans sa poitrine" [see Sismondi, 1815, x. 46, and Daru, 1821, ii. 536; see, too, <i>The Two Foscari</i>, act v. sc. i, line 306, and Introduction to the <i>Two Foscari</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 118, 193], at the age of eighty years, when "<i>Who would have thought the old man had so much blood in him?</i>" (<i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 1, lines 34-36.) Before I was sixteen years of age I was witness to a melancholy instance of the same effect of mixed passions upon a young person, who, however, did not die in consequence, at that time, but fell a victim some years afterwards to a seizure of the same kind, arising from causes intimately connected with agitation of mind.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_246"><span class="label">[246]</span></a> {200}[The view of the Venus of Medici instantly suggests the lines in the "Seasons" [the description of "Musidora bathing" in <i>Summer</i>]—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i13">" ... With wild surprise,</p>
							<p>As if to marble struck, devoid of sense,</p>
							<p>A stupid moment motionless she stood:</p>
							<p>So stands the statue that enchants the world."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Hobhouse.</p>
					<p>A still closer parallel to this stanza, and to <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanzas xlix., cxl., cxli., clx., clxi., is to be found in Thomson's <i>Liberty</i>, pt. iv. lines 131-206, where the "Farnese Hercules," the "Dying Gladiator," the "Venus of Medici," and the "Laocoon" group, are commemorated as typical works of art.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DX"><span class="label">[DX]</span></a> <i>Distinct from life, as being still the same</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DY"><span class="label">[DY]</span></a> {202}<i>—working slow.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_DZ"><span class="label">[DZ]</span></a> <i>Have dawned a child of beauty, though of sin.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_247">
							<span class="label">[247]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i8">[" ... Duncan is in his grave:</p>
							<p>After life's fitful fever he sleeps well."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 2., lines 22, 23.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EA"><span class="label">[EA]</span></a> {203}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2"><i>No stone is there to read, nor tongue to say</i>,</p>
							<p><i>No dirge—save when arise the stormy seas</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_248"><span class="label">[248]</span></a> ["But now I am cabined, cribbed," etc. <i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 24.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_249"><span class="label">[249]</span></a> {204}[Jacob Bryant (1715-1804) published his <i>Dissertation concerning the War of Troy, etc.</i>, in 1796. See <i>The Bride of Abydos</i>, Canto II. lines 510, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 179, note 1. See, too, <i>Extracts from a Diary</i>, January 11, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 165, 166, "I have stood upon that plain [of Troy] <i>daily</i>, for more than a month, in 1810; and if anything diminished my pleasure, it was that the blackguard Bryant had impugned its veracity." Hobhouse, in his <i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 93, sq., discusses at length the identity of the barrows of the Troad with the <i>tumuli</i> of Achilles, Ajax, and Protesilaus, and refutes Bryant's arguments against the identity of Cape Janissary and the Sigean promontory.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EB">
							<span class="label">[EB]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<table class="variant">
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<i>All heroes</i>
								</td>
								<td>
									<span style="font-size:250%;font-weight:lighter;">{</span>
								</td>
								<td>
									<i>who alive perhaps<br/>
									if still alive</i>
								</td>
								<td>
									<span style="font-size:250%;font-weight:lighter;">}</span>
								</td>
								<td>.—[MS. Alternative reading]</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EC">
							<span class="label">[EC]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<table class="variant">
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>—</td>
								<td>
									<span style="font-size:250%;font-weight:lighter;">{</span>
								</td>
								<td>
									<i>and mountain-bounded<br/>
									and mountain-outlined</i>
								</td>
								<td>
									<span style="font-size:250%;font-weight:lighter;">}</span>
								</td>
								<td><i>plain</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading]</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_250"><span class="label">[250]</span></a> ["The whole region was, in a manner, in possession of the <i>Salsette's</i> crew, parties of whom, in their white summer dresses, might be seen scattered over the plains collecting the tortoises, which swarm on the sides of the rivulets, and are found under every furze-bush."—<i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 116. See, too, for mention of "hundreds of tortoises" falling "from the overhanging branches, and thick underwood," into the waters of the Mender, <i>Travels, etc.</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1812, Part II. sect. i. p. 96.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_ED"><span class="label">[ED]</span></a> —— <i>and land tortoise crawls</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EE"><span class="label">[EE]</span></a> {205}—<i>their learned researches bear</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_251"><span class="label">[251]</span></a> This is a fact. A few years ago a man engaged a company for some foreign theatre, embarked them at an Italian port, and carrying them to Algiers, sold them all. One of the women, returned from her captivity, I heard sing, by a strange coincidence, in Rossini's opera of <i>L'Italiana in Algieri</i>, at Venice, in the beginning of 1817.</p>
					<p>[We have reason to believe that the following, which we take from the MS. journal of a highly respectable traveller, is a more correct account: "In 1812 a Signor Guariglia induced several young persons of both sexes—none of them exceeding fifteen years of age—to accompany him on an operatic excursion; part to form the opera, and part the ballet. He contrived to get them on board a vessel, which took them to Janina, where he sold them for the basest purposes. Some died from the effect of the climate, and some from suffering. Among the few who returned were a Signor Molinari, and a female dancer named Bonfiglia, who afterwards became the wife of Crespi, the tenor singer. The wretch who so basely sold them was, when Lord Byron resided at Venice, employed as <i>capo de' vestarj</i>, or head tailor, at the Fenice."—Maria Graham (Lady Callcot). Ed. 1832.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_252"><span class="label">[252]</span></a> {206}[A comic singer in the <i>opera buffa</i>. The Italians, however, distinguish the <i>buffo cantante</i>, which requires good singing, from the <i>buffo comico</i>, in which there is more acting.—Ed. 1832.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_253"><span class="label">[253]</span></a> {207}[The figuranti are those dancers of a ballet who do not dance singly, but many together, and serve to fill up the background during the exhibition of individual performers. They correspond to the chorus in the opera.—Maria Graham.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EF"><span class="label">[EF]</span></a> <i>To help the ladies in their dress and lacing</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_254"><span class="label">[254]</span></a> It is strange that it should be the Pope and the Sultan, who are the chief encouragers of this branch of trade—women being prohibited as singers at St. Peter's, and not deemed trustworthy as guardians of the harem.</p>
					<p>["Scarcely a soul of them can read. Pacchierotti was one of the best informed of the <i>castrati</i> ... Marchesi is so grossly ignorant that he wrote the word opera, <i>opperra</i>, but Nature has been so bountiful to the animal, that his ignorance and insolence were forgotten the moment he sang."—<i>Venice, etc.</i>, by a Lady of Rank, 1824, ii. 86.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_255"><span class="label">[255]</span></a> {208}[The N. Engl. Dict. cites Bunyan, Walpole, Fielding, Miss Austen, and Dickens as authorities for the plural "was." See art. "be." Here, as elsewhere, Byron wrote as he spoke.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EG"><span class="label">[EG]</span></a> <i>He never shows his feelings, but his teeth</i>.—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_256"><span class="label">[256]</span></a> ["Our firman arrived from Constantinople on the 30th of April (1810)."—Travels in Albania, 1858, ii. 186.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EH"><span class="label">[EH]</span></a> {209}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>That each pulled, different ways—and waxing rough</i>,</p>
							<p><i>Had cuffed each other, only for the cuff</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_257"><span class="label">[257]</span></a> {210}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["O, who can hold a fire in his hand,</p>
							<p>By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?"</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Richard II.,</i> act i. sc. 3, lines 294, 295.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EI"><span class="label">[EI]</span></a> <i>Having had some experience in my youth</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_258"><span class="label">[258]</span></a> ["<i>Don Juan</i> will be known, <i>by and by</i>, for what it is intended—a Satire on abuses in the present states of society, and not an eulogy of vice. It may be now and then voluptuous:—I can't help that. Ariosto is worse. Smollett (see Lord Strutwell in vol. 2<sup>nd</sup> of <i>R</i>[<i>oderick</i>] <i>R</i>[<i>andom</i>][1793, pp. 119-127]) ten times worse; and Fielding no better."—Letter to Murray, December 25, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 155, 156.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_259"><span class="label">[259]</span></a> {211} [<i>Vide ante</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#Footnote_249">p. 204, note 1</a>. "It seems hardly to admit of doubt, that the plain of Anatolia, watered by the Mender, and backed by a mountainous ridge, of which Kazdaghy is the summit, offers the precise territory alluded to by Homer. The long controversy, excited by Mr. Bryant's publication, and since so vehemently agitated, would probably never have existed, had it not been for the erroneous maps of the country which, even to this hour, disgrace our geographical knowledge of that part of Asia."—<i>Travels, etc.</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1812, Part II. sect, i. p. 78.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_260"><span class="label">[260]</span></a> {212}The pillar which records the battle of Ravenna is about two miles from the city, on the opposite side of the river to the road towards Forli. Gaston de Foix [(1489-1512) Duc de Nemours, nephew of Louis XII.], who gained the battle, was killed in it: there fell on both sides twenty thousand men. The present state of the pillar and its site is described in the text.</p>
					<p>[Beyond the Porta Sisi, about two miles from Ravenna, on the banks of the Ronco, is a square pillar (<i>La Colonna de Francesi</i>), erected in 1557 by Pietro Cesi, president of Romagna, as a memorial of the battle gained by the combined army of Louis XII. and the Duke of Ferrara over the troops of Julius II. and the King of Spain, April 11 1512.—<i>Handbook of Northern Italy</i>, p. 548.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_261"><span class="label">[261]</span></a> [Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza lvii. line i, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 371, note i. See, too, Preface to the <i>Prophecy of Dante, ibid</i>., iv. 243.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EJ"><span class="label">[EJ]</span></a> <i>Protects his tomb, but greater care is paid</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EK"><span class="label">[EK]</span></a> {213}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2"><i>With human ordure is it now defiled</i>,</p>
							<p>
								<i>As if the peasant's scorn this mode invented</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>To show his loathing of the thing he soiled</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EL"><span class="label">[EL]</span></a> <i>Those sufferings once reserved for Hell alone.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EM">
							<span class="label">[EM]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Its fumes are frankincense; and were there nought</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>Even of this vapour, still the chilling yoke</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Of silence would not long be borne by Thought</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EN">
							<span class="label">[EN]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>I have drunk deep of passions as they pass,</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>And dearly bought the bitter power to give</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_262"><span class="label">[262]</span></a> [See, for instance, Wilson's review of <i>Don Juan</i>, in <i>Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine</i>, August, 1819, vol. v. p. 512, <i>sq.</i>: "To confess ... to his Maker, and to weep over in secret agonies the wildest and most fantastic transgressions of heart and mind, is the part of a conscious sinner, in whom sin has not become the sole principle of life and action.... But to lay bare to the eye of man—and of <i>woman</i>—all the hidden convulsions of a wicked spirit," etc.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EO"><span class="label">[EO]</span></a> {214}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>What! must I go with Wordy to the cooks?</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Read—were it but your Grandmother's to vex—</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>And let me not the only minstrel be</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Cut off from tasting your Castalian tea</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_263"><span class="label">[263]</span></a> [Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"I leave them to their daily 'tea is ready,'</p>
							<p>Snug coterie, and literary lady."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p><i>Beppo</i>, stanza lxxvi. lines 7, 8, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 184, note.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_264"><span class="label">[264]</span></a> [The caged starling, by its repeated cry, "I can't get out! I can't get out!" cured Yorick of his sentimental yearnings for imprisonment in the Bastille. See Sterne's <i>Sentimental Journey</i>, ed. 1804, pp. 100-106.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_265"><span class="label">[265]</span></a> [In his <i>Essay, Supplement to the Preface</i> (<i>Poems by William Wordsworth</i>, ed. 1820, iii. 315-348), Wordsworth maintains that the appreciation of great poetry is a plant of slow growth, that immediate recognition is a mark of inferiority, or is to be accounted for by the presence of adventitious qualities: "So strange, indeed, are the obliquities of admiration, that they whose opinions are much influenced by authority will often be tempted to think that there are no fixed principles in human nature for this art to rest upon.... Away, then, with the senseless iteration of the word <i>popular!</i> ... The voice that issues from this spirit [of human knowledge] is that <i>Vox Populi</i> which the Deity inspires. Foolish must he be who can mistake for this a local acclamation, or a transitory outcry—transitory though it be for years, local though from a Nation. Still more lamentable is his error who can believe that there is anything of divine infallibility in this clamour of that small though loud portion of the community ever governed by factitious influence, which under the name of the <span class="smcap">Public</span>, passes itself upon the unthinking for the <span class="smcap">People</span>." Naturally enough Byron regarded this pronouncement as a taunt if not as a challenge. Wordsworth's noble appeal from a provincial to an imperial authority, from the present to the future, is not strengthened by the obvious reference to the popularity of contemporaries.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_266"><span class="label">[266]</span></a> {215}[Southey's <i>Madoc in Wales, Poetical Works</i>, Part I. Canto V. Ed. 1838, v. 39.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EP">
							<span class="label">[EP]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Not having looked at many of that hue,</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Nor garters—save those of the</i> "honi soit"—<i>which lie</i></p>
							<p>
								<i>Round the Patrician legs which walk about,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>The ornaments of levee and of rout</i>.—[M.S.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_267"><span class="label">[267]</span></a> [Probably Lady Charlemont. See "Journal," November 22, 1813.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_268"><span class="label">[268]</span></a> {216}[The cyanometer, an instrument for ascertaining the intensity of the blue colour of the sky, was invented by Horace Bénédict de Saussure (1740-1799); see his <i>Essai sur l'Hygrométrie</i>. F.H. Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859) "made great use of his instrument on his voyages, and ascertained by the colour the degree of blueness, the accumulation and the nature of the non-transparent exhalations of the air."—<i>Alexander von Humboldt</i>, by Professor Klencke, translated by Juliette Bauer, 1852, pp. 45, 46.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_EQ">
							<span class="label">[EQ]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i4"><i>I'll back a London</i> "Bas" <i>against Peru</i>.</p>
							<p>or, <i>I'll bet some pair of stocking beat Peru</i>.</p>
							<p>or, <i>And so, old Sotheby, we'll measure you</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_269"><span class="label">[269]</span></a> ["The slave-market is a quadrangle, surrounded by a covered gallery, and ranges of small and separate apartments." Here the poor wretches sit in a melancholy posture. "Before they cheapen 'em, they turn 'em about from this side to that, survey 'em from top to bottom.... Such of 'em, both men and women, to whom Dame Nature has been niggardly of her charms, are set apart for the vilest services: but such girls as have youth and beauty pass their time well enough.... The retailers of this human ware are the Jews, who take good care of their slaves' education, that they may sell the better: their choicest they keep at home, and there you must go, if you would have better than ordinary; for 'tis here, as 'tis in markets for horses, the handsomest don't always appear, but are kept within doors."—<i>A Voyage into the Levant</i>, by M. Tournefort, 1741, ii. 198, 199. See, too, for the description of the sale of two Circassians and one Georgian, <i>Voyage de Vienne à Belgrade</i>, ... par N.E. Kleeman, 1780, pp. 141, 142. The "lowest offer for the prize Circassian was 4000 piastres."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_ER">
							<span class="label">[ER]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>The females stood, till chosen each as victim</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>To the soft oath of "Ana seing Siktum!"</i>[<b>*</b>]—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>[<b>*</b> If the Turkish words are correctly given, "the oath" may be an imprecation on "your mother's" chastity.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_ES"><span class="label">[ES]</span></a> <i>For fear the Canto should become too long.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
