<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-10-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Newton saw an apple fall, he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that slight startle from his contemplation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is <em>said</em> (for I’ll not answer above ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For any sage’s creed or calculation)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mode of proving that the Earth turned round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a most natural whirl, called “gravitation;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is the sole mortal who could grapple,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-804" id="noteref-804" epub:type="noteref">804</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Adam⁠—with a fall⁠—or with an apple.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-805" id="noteref-805" epub:type="noteref">805</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-806" id="noteref-806" epub:type="noteref">806</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Man fell with apples, and with apples rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If this be true; for we must deem the mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which Sir Isaac Newton could disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the then unpaved stars the turnpike road,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-807" id="noteref-807" epub:type="noteref">807</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing to counterbalance human woes:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-808" id="noteref-808" epub:type="noteref">808</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever since immortal man hath glowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all kinds of mechanics, and full soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steam-engines will conduct him to the moon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And wherefore this exordium?⁠—Why, just now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In taking up this paltry sheet of paper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bosom underwent a glorious glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my internal spirit cut a caper:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though so much inferior, as I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those who, by the dint of glass and vapour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discover stars, and sail in the wind’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish to do as much by Poesy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the wind’s eye I have sailed, and sail; but for</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stars, I own my telescope is dim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the least I have shunned the common shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leaving land far out of sight, would skim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ocean of Eternity:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-809" id="noteref-809" epub:type="noteref">809</a> the roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of breakers has not daunted my slight, trim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <em>still</em> sea-worthy skiff; and she may float</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where ships have foundered, as doth many a boat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We left our hero, Juan, in the <em>bloom</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of favouritism, but not yet in the <i>blush;⁠—</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far be it from my <em>Muses</em> to presume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For I have more than one Muse at a push),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow him beyond the drawing-room:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is enough that Fortune found him flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Youth, and Vigour, Beauty, and those things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for an instant clip Enjoyment’s wings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But soon they grow again and leave their nest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Oh!” saith the Psalmist, “that I had a dove’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pinions to flee away, and be at rest!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who that recollects young years and loves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hoary now, and with a withering breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And palsied Fancy, which no longer roves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond its dimmed eye’s sphere⁠—but would much rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sigh like his son, than cough like his grandfather?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But sighs subside, and tears (even widows’) shrink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Arno<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-810" id="noteref-810" epub:type="noteref">810</a> in the summer, to a shallow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So narrow as to shame their wintry brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which threatens inundations deep and yellow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such difference doth a few months make. You’d think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grief a rich field which never would lie fallow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more it doth⁠—its ploughs but change their boys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who furrow some new soil to sow for joys.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But coughs will come when sighs depart⁠—and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then before sighs cease; for oft the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will bring the other, ere the lake-like brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is ruffled by a wrinkle, or the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Life reached ten o’clock: and while a glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hectic and brief as summer’s day nigh done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erspreads the cheek which seems too pure for clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thousands blaze, love, hope, die⁠—how happy they!⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was not meant to die so soon:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We left him in the focus of such glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As may be won by favour of the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ladies’ fancies⁠—rather transitory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps; but who would scorn the month of June,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because December, with his breath so hoary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must come? Much rather should he court the ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hoard up warmth against a wintry day.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, he had some qualities which fix</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Middle-aged ladies even more than young:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former know what’s what; while new-fledged chicks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know little more of Love than what is sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rhymes, or dreamt (for Fancy will play tricks)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In visions of those skies from whence Love sprung.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some reckon women by their suns or years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rather think the Moon should date the dears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And why? because she’s changeable and chaste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know no other reason, whatsoe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspicious people, who find fault in haste,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-811" id="noteref-811" epub:type="noteref">811</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May choose to tax me with; which is not fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor flattering to “their temper or their taste,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As my friend Jeffrey writes with such an air:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-812" id="noteref-812" epub:type="noteref">812</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>However, I forgive him, and I trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will forgive himself;⁠—if not, I must.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Old enemies who have become new friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should so continue⁠—’t is a point of honour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I know nothing which could make amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a return to Hatred: I would shun her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like garlic, howsoever she extends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hundred arms and legs, and fain outrun her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old flames, new wives, become our bitterest foes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Converted foes should scorn to join with those.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This were the worst desertion:⁠—renegadoes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even shuffling Southey, that incarnate lie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-813" id="noteref-813" epub:type="noteref">813</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would scarcely join again the “reformadoes,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-814" id="noteref-814" epub:type="noteref">814</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he forsook to fill the Laureate’s sty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honest men from Iceland to Barbadoes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether in Caledon or Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should not veer round with every breath, nor seize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pain, the moment when you cease to please.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lawyer and the critic but behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The baser sides of literature and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nought remains unseen, but much untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By those who scour those double vales of strife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While common men grow ignorantly old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lawyer’s brief is like the surgeon’s knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissecting the whole inside of a question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with it all the process of digestion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-815" id="noteref-815" epub:type="noteref">815</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A legal broom’s a moral chimney-sweeper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that’s the reason he himself’s so dirty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endless soot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-816" id="noteref-816" epub:type="noteref">816</a> bestows a tint far deeper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than can be hid by altering his shirt; he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retains the sable stains of the dark creeper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least some twenty-nine do out of thirty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all their habits;⁠—not so <em>you</em>, I own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Cæsar wore his robe you wear your gown.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-817" id="noteref-817" epub:type="noteref">817</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And all our little feuds, at least all <em>mine</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear Jeffrey, once my most redoubted foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As far as rhyme and criticism combine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make such puppets of us things below),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are over: Here’s a health to “Auld Lang Syne!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I do not know you, and may never know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your face⁠—but you have acted on the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most nobly, and I own it from my soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when I use the phrase of “Auld Lang Syne!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is not addressed to you⁠—the more’s the pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, for I would rather take my wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With you, than aught (save Scott) in your proud city:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But somehow⁠—it may seem a schoolboy’s whine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet I seek not to be grand nor witty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am half a Scot by birth, and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A whole one, and my heart flies to my head⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-818" id="noteref-818" epub:type="noteref">818</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As “Auld Lang Syne” brings Scotland, one and all,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-819" id="noteref-819" epub:type="noteref">819</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scotch plaids, Scotch snoods, the blue hills, and clear streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Dee⁠—the Don⁠—Balgounie’s brig’s <em>black wall</em>⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-820" id="noteref-820" epub:type="noteref">820</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All my boy feelings, all my gentler dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what I <em>then dreamt</em>, clothed in their own pall⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Banquo’s offspring⁠—floating past me seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My childhood, in this childishness of mine:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not⁠—’t is a glimpse of “<i>Auld Lang Syne</i>.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And though, as you remember, in a fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wrath and rhyme, when juvenile and curly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I railed at Scots to show my wrath and wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which must be owned was sensitive and surly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ’t is in vain such sallies to permit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cannot quench young feelings fresh and early:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I “<em>scotched</em> not killed” the Scotchman in my blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love the land of “mountain and of flood.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-821" id="noteref-821" epub:type="noteref">821</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan, who was real, or ideal⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both are much the same, since what men think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exists when the once thinkers are less real</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than what they thought, for Mind can never sink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’gainst the Body makes a strong appeal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet ’t is very puzzling on the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what is called Eternity to stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know no more of what is <em>here</em>, than <em>there</em>;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan grew a very polished Russian⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>How</em> we won’t mention, <em>why</em> we need not say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few youthful minds can stand the strong concussion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of any slight temptation in their way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <em>his</em> just now were spread as is a cushion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smoothed for a Monarch’s seat of honour: gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Damsels, and dances, revels, ready money,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made ice seem Paradise, and winter sunny.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The favour of the Empress was agreeable;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though the duty waxed a little hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young people at his time of life should be able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come off handsomely in that regard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was now growing up like a green tree, able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love, War, or Ambition, which reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their luckier votaries, till old Age’s tedium</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make some prefer the circulating medium.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>About this time, as might have been anticipated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seduced by Youth and dangerous examples,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don Juan grew, I fear, a little dissipated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is a sad thing, and not only tramples</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On our fresh feelings, but⁠—as being participated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all kinds of incorrigible samples</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of frail humanity⁠—must make us selfish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shut our souls up in us like a shell-fish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This we pass over. We will also pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The usual progress of intrigues between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unequal matches, such as are, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A young Lieutenant’s with a <em>not old</em> Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one who is not so youthful as she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the royalty of sweet seventeen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-822" id="noteref-822" epub:type="noteref">822</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sovereigns may sway materials, but not matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrinkles, the d⁠⸺⁠d democrats! won’t flatter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Death, the Sovereign’s Sovereign, though the great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gracchus of all mortality, who levels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his <em>Agrarian</em> laws,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-823" id="noteref-823" epub:type="noteref">823</a> the high estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him who feasts, and fights, and roars, and revels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one small grass-grown patch (which must await</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corruption for its crop) with the poor devils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who never had a foot of land till now⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death’s a reformer⁠—all men must allow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He lived (not Death, but Juan) in a hurry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of waste, and haste, and glare, and gloss, and glitter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this gay clime of bear-skins black and furry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which (though I hate to say a thing that’s bitter)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peep out sometimes, when things are in a flurry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the “purple and fine linen,” fitter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Babylon’s than Russia’s royal harlot⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And neutralise her outward show of scarlet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And this same state we won’t describe: we would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps from hearsay, or from recollection:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But getting nigh grim Dante’s “obscure wood,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-824" id="noteref-824" epub:type="noteref">824</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That horrid equinox, that hateful section</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human years⁠—that half-way house⁠—that rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hut, whence wise travellers drive with circumspection<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-825" id="noteref-825" epub:type="noteref">825</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s sad post-horses o’er the dreary frontier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Age, and looking back to Youth, give <em>one</em> tear;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I won’t describe⁠—that is, if I can help</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Description; and I won’t reflect⁠—that is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I can stave off thought, which⁠—as a whelp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clings to its teat⁠—sticks to me through the abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this odd labyrinth; or as the kelp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holds by the rock; or as a lover’s kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drains its first draught of lips:⁠—but, as I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I <em>won’t</em> philosophise, and <em>will</em> be read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, instead of courting courts, was courted⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing which happens rarely: this he owed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much to his youth, and much to his reported</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Valour; much also to the blood he showed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a race-horse; much to each dress he sported,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which set the beauty off in which he glowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As purple clouds befringe the sun; but most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He owed to an old woman and his post.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He wrote to Spain;⁠—and all his near relations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiving he was in a handsome way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of getting on himself, and finding stations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For cousins also, answered the same day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Several prepared themselves for emigrations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eating ices, were o’erheard to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the addition of a slight pelisse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madrid’s and Moscow’s climes were of a piece.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His mother, Donna Inez, finding, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the lieu of drawing on his banker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where his assets were waxing rather few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had brought his spending to a handsome anchor⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied, “that she was glad to see him through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those pleasures after which wild youth will hanker;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the sole sign of Man’s being in his senses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is⁠—learning to reduce his past expenses.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-826" id="noteref-826" epub:type="noteref">826</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“She also recommended him to God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no less to God’s Son, as well as Mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warned him against Greek worship, which looks odd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Catholic eyes; but told him, too, to smother</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Outward</em> dislike, which don’t look well abroad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Informed him that he had a little brother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born in a second wedlock; and above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, praised the Empress’s <em>maternal</em> love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“She could not too much give her approbation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto an Empress, who preferred young men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose age, and what was better still, whose nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And climate, stopped all scandal (now and then);⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At home it might have given her some vexation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But where thermometers sink down to ten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or five, or one, or zero, she could never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe that Virtue thawed before the river.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-827" id="noteref-827" epub:type="noteref">827</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh for a <em>forty-parson power</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-828" id="noteref-828" epub:type="noteref">828</a>⁠—to chant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy praise, Hypocrisy! Oh for a hymn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud as the virtues thou dost loudly vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not practise! Oh for trump of Cherubim!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the ear-trumpet of my good old aunt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-829" id="noteref-829" epub:type="noteref">829</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, though her spectacles at last grew dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew quiet consolation through its hint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she no more could read the pious print.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was no Hypocrite at least, poor soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But went to heaven in as sincere a way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As anybody on the elected roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which portions out upon the Judgment Day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s freeholds, in a sort of Doomsday scroll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as the conqueror William did repay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His knights with, lotting others’ properties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some sixty thousand new knights’ fees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I can’t complain, whose ancestors are there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Erneis, Radulphus⁠—eight-and-forty manors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If that my memory doth not greatly err)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were <em>their</em> reward for following Billy’s banners:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-830" id="noteref-830" epub:type="noteref">830</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I can’t help thinking ’t was scarce fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To strip the Saxons of their <em>hydes</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-831" id="noteref-831" epub:type="noteref">831</a> like tanners;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet as they founded churches with the produce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll deem, no doubt, they put it to a good use.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-832" id="noteref-832" epub:type="noteref">832</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle Juan flourished, though at times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He felt like other plants called sensitive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shrink from touch, as Monarchs do from rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save such as Southey can afford to give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he longed in bitter frosts for climes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which the Neva’s ice would cease to live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before May-day: perhaps, despite his duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Royalty’s vast arms he sighed for Beauty:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps⁠—but, sans perhaps, we need not seek<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-833" id="noteref-833" epub:type="noteref">833</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For causes young or old: the canker-worm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will feed upon the fairest, freshest cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well as further drain the withered form:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Care, like a housekeeper, brings every week</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bills in, and however we may storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They must be paid: though six days smoothly run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seventh will bring blue devils or a dun.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t know how it was, but he grew sick:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Empress was alarmed, and her physician</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The same who physicked Peter) found the tick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his fierce pulse betoken a condition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which augured of the dead, however <em>quick</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself, and showed a feverish disposition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which the whole Court was extremely troubled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sovereign shocked, and all his medicines doubled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Low were the whispers, manifold the rumours:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some said he had been poisoned by Potemkin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others talked learnedly of certain tumours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exhaustion, or disorders of the same kin;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-834" id="noteref-834" epub:type="noteref">834</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some said ’t was a concoction of the humours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with the blood too readily will claim kin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others again were ready to maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’T was only the fatigue of last campaign.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here is one prescription out of many:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“<i>Sodae sulphat.</i> ʒvj. ʒfs. <i>Mannae optim.</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Aq. fervent.</i> f. ℥ ifs. ʒij. <i>tinct. Sennae</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Haustus</i>” (And here the surgeon came and cupped him)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“℞ <i>Pulv. Com.</i> gr. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iij</span>. <i>Ipecacuanhæ</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(With more beside if Juan had not stopped ’em).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>Bolus Potassae Sulphuret. sumendus</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Et haustus ter in die capiendus.</i>”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This is the way physicians mend or end us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Secundum artem</i>: but although we sneer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In health⁠—when ill, we call them to attend us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the least propensity to jeer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that “<i>hiatus maxime deflendus</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be filled up by spade or mattock’s near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of gliding graciously down Lethe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We tease mild Baillie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-835" id="noteref-835" epub:type="noteref">835</a> or soft Abernethy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan demurred at this first notice to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quit; and though Death had threatened an ejection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His youth and constitution bore him through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent the doctors in a new direction.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still his state was delicate: the hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of health but flickered with a faint reflection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along his wasted cheek, and seemed to gravel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faculty⁠—who said that he must travel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The climate was too cold, they said, for him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meridian-born, to bloom in. This opinion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made the chaste Catherine look a little grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did not like at first to lose her minion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she saw his dazzling eye wax dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drooping like an eagle’s with clipt pinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She then resolved to send him on a mission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a style becoming his condition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was just then a kind of a discussion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sort of treaty or negotiation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the British cabinet and Russian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maintained with all the due prevarication</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which great states such things are apt to push on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something about the Baltic’s navigation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hides, train-oil, tallow, and the rights of Thetis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Britons deem their <i>uti possidetis</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Catherine, who had a handsome way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fitting out her favourites, conferred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This secret charge on Juan, to display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At once her royal splendour, and reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His services. He kissed hands the next day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Received instructions how to play his card,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was laden with all kinds of gifts and honours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which showed what great discernment was the donor’s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But she was lucky, and luck’s all. Your Queens</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are generally prosperous in reigning⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which puzzles us to know what Fortune means:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to continue⁠—though her years were waning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her climacteric teased her like her teens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though her dignity brooked no complaining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much did Juan’s setting off distress her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could not find at first a fit successor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Time, the comforter, will come at last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And four-and-twenty hours, and twice that number</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of candidates requesting to be placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made Catherine taste next night a quiet slumber:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that she meant to fix again in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor did she find the quantity encumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But always choosing with deliberation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept the place open for their emulation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While this high post of honour’s in abeyance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one or two days, reader, we request</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll mount with our young hero the conveyance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wafted him from Petersburgh: the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barouche, which had the glory to display once</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fair Czarina’s autocratic crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, a new Iphigene, she went to Tauris,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was given to her favourite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-836" id="noteref-836" epub:type="noteref">836</a> and now <em>bore his</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A bull-dog, and a bullfinch, and an ermine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All private favourites of Don Juan;⁠—for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Let deeper sages the true cause determine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a kind of inclination, or</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weakness, for what most people deem mere vermin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Live animals: an old maid of threescore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For cats and birds more penchant ne’er displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although he was not old, nor even a maid;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The animals aforesaid occupied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their station: there were valets, secretaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other vehicles; but at his side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sat little Leila, who survived the parries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made ’gainst Cossacque sabres in the wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slaughter of Ismail. Though my wild Muse varies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her note, she don’t forget the infant girl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom he preserved, a pure and living pearl.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Poor little thing! She was as fair as docile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with that gentle, serious character,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As rare in living beings as a fossile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Man, ’midst thy mouldy mammoths, “grand Cuvier!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-837" id="noteref-837" epub:type="noteref">837</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill fitted was her ignorance to jostle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this o’erwhelming world, where all must err:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she was yet but ten years old, and therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was tranquil, though she knew not why or wherefore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan loved her, and she loved him, as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor brother, father, sister, daughter love.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot tell exactly what it was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was not yet quite old enough to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parental feelings, and the other class,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called brotherly affection, could not move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bosom⁠—for he never had a sister:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! if he had⁠—how much he would have missed her!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And still less was it sensual; for besides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he was not an ancient debauchee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Who like sour fruit, to stir their veins’ salt tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As acids rouse a dormant alkali,)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-838" id="noteref-838" epub:type="noteref">838</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although (<em>’t will</em> happen as our planet guides)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His youth was not the chastest that might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the purest Platonism at bottom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his feelings⁠—only he forgot ’em.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Just now there was no peril of temptation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He loved the infant orphan he had saved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As patriots (now and then) may love a nation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His pride, too, felt that she was not enslaved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Owing to him;⁠—as also her salvation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his means and the Church’s might be paved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing’s odd, which here must be inserted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Turk refused to be converted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’T was strange enough she should retain the impression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through such a scene of change, and dread, and slaughter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though three Bishops told her the transgression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She showed a great dislike to holy water;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She also had no passion for confession;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps she had nothing to confess:⁠—no matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er the cause, the Church made little of it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She still held out that Mahomet was a prophet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In fact, the only Christian she could bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Juan; whom she seemed to have selected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In place of what her home and friends once <em>were</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>He</em> naturally loved what he protected:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus they formed a rather curious pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A guardian green in years, a ward connected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In neither clime, time, blood, with her defender;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet this want of ties made theirs more tender.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They journeyed on through Poland and through Warsaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Famous for mines of salt and yokes of iron:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Courland also, which that famous farce saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gave her dukes the graceless name of “Biron.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-839" id="noteref-839" epub:type="noteref">839</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is the same landscape which the modern Mars saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who marched to Moscow, led by Fame, the Siren!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose by one month’s frost some twenty years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conquest, and his guard of Grenadiers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let this not seem an anti-climax:⁠—“Oh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My guard! my old guard!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-840" id="noteref-840" epub:type="noteref">840</a> exclaimed that god of clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think of the Thunderer’s falling down below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Carotid-artery-cutting Castlereagh!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-841" id="noteref-841" epub:type="noteref">841</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! that glory should be chilled by snow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But should we wish to warm us on our way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Poland, there is Kosciusko’s name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might scatter fire through ice, like Hecla’s flame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From Poland they came on through Prussia Proper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Königsberg, the capital, whose vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides some veins of iron, lead, or copper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has lately been the great Professor Kant.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-842" id="noteref-842" epub:type="noteref">842</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan, who cared not a tobacco-stopper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About philosophy, pursued his jaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Germany, whose somewhat tardy millions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have princes who spur more than their postilions.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thence through Berlin, Dresden, and the like,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he reached the castellated Rhine:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye glorious Gothic scenes! how much ye strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All phantasies, not even excepting mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grey wall, a green ruin, rusty pike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make my soul pass the equinoctial line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the present and past worlds, and hover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon their airy confines, half-seas-over.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan posted on through Mannheim, Bonn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Drachenfels<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-843" id="noteref-843" epub:type="noteref">843</a> frowns over like a spectre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the good feudal times for ever gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which I have not time just now to lecture.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence he was drawn onwards to Cologne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A city which presents to the inspector</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eleven thousand maiden heads of bone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest number flesh hath ever known.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-844" id="noteref-844" epub:type="noteref">844</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From thence to Holland’s Hague and Helvoetsluys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That water-land of Dutchmen and of ditches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where juniper expresses its best juice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poor man’s sparkling substitute for riches.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Senates and sages have condemned its use⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to deny the mob a cordial, which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too often all the clothing, meat, or fuel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good government has left them, seems but cruel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here he embarked, and with a flowing sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went bounding for the Island of the free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards which the impatient wind blew half a gale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High dashed the spray, the bows dipped in the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sea-sick passengers turned somewhat pale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Juan, seasoned, as he well might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By former voyages, stood to watch the skiffs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which passed, or catch the first glimpse of the cliffs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At length they rose, like a white wall along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blue sea’s border; and Don Juan felt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What even young strangers feel a little strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first sight of Albion’s chalky belt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind of pride that he should be among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those haughty shopkeepers, who sternly dealt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their goods and edicts out from pole to pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made the very billows pay them toll.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ve no great cause to love that spot of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which holds what <em>might have been</em> the noblest nation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though I owe it little but my birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I feel a mixed regret and veneration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For its decaying fame and former worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven years (the usual term of transportation)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of absence lay one’s old resentments level,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a man’s country’s going to the devil.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! could she but fully, truly, know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How her great name is now throughout abhorred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How eager all the Earth is for the blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which shall lay bare her bosom to the sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How all the nations deem her their worst foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That worse than <em>worst of foes</em>, the once adored</span>
					<br/>
					<span>False friend, who held out Freedom to Mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now would chain them⁠—to the very <em>mind</em>;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Would she be proud, or boast herself the free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is but first of slaves? The nations are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prison⁠—but the gaoler, what is he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No less a victim to the bolt and bar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the poor privilege to turn the key</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the captive, Freedom? He’s as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the enjoyment of the earth and air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who watches o’er the chain, as they who wear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan now saw Albion’s earliest beauties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy cliffs, <em>dear</em> Dover! harbour, and hotel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy custom-house, with all its delicate duties;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy waiters running mucks at every bell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy packets, all whose passengers are booties</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those who upon land or water dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, not least, to strangers uninstructed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy long, long bills, whence nothing is deducted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, though careless, young, and <i>magnifique</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rich in rubles, diamonds, cash, and credit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who did not limit much his bills per week,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet stared at this a little, though he paid it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(His Maggior Duomo, a smart, subtle Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before him summed the awful scroll and read it):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, doubtless, as the air⁠—though seldom sunny⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is free, the respiration’s worth the money.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On with the horses! Off to Canterbury!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tramp, tramp o’er pebble, and splash, splash through puddle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurrah! how swiftly speeds the post so merry!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not like slow Germany, wherein they muddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the road,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-845" id="noteref-845" epub:type="noteref">845</a> as if they went to bury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fare; and also pause besides, to fuddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With “schnapps”⁠—sad dogs! whom “Hundsfot,” or “Verflucter,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-846" id="noteref-846" epub:type="noteref">846</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affect no more than lightning a conductor.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-847" id="noteref-847" epub:type="noteref">847</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now there is nothing gives a man such spirits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leavening his blood as cayenne doth a curry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As going at full speed⁠—no matter where its</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direction be, so ’t is but in a hurry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely for the sake of its own merits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the less cause there is for all this flurry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater is the pleasure in arriving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the great <em>end</em> of travel⁠—which is driving.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They saw at Canterbury the cathedral;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Black Edward’s helm, and Becket’s bloody stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were pointed out as usual by the bedral,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the same quaint, uninterested tone:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s glory again for you, gentle reader! All</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ends in a rusty casque and dubious bone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-848" id="noteref-848" epub:type="noteref">848</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-solved into these sodas or magnesias,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which form that bitter draught, the human species.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The effect on Juan was of course sublime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He breathed a thousand Cressys, as he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That casque, which never stooped except to Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even the bold Churchman’s tomb excited awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who died in the then great attempt to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er Kings, who <em>now</em> at least <em>must talk</em> of Law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before they butcher. Little Leila gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked why such a structure had been raised:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And being told it was “God’s House,” she said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was well lodged, but only wondered how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He suffered Infidels in his homestead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cruel Nazarenes, who had laid low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His holy temples in the lands which bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The True Believers;⁠—and her infant brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was bent with grief that Mahomet should resign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mosque so noble, flung like pearls to swine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On! on! through meadows, managed like a garden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A paradise of hops and high production;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, after years of travel by a bard in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Countries of greater heat, but lesser suction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A green field is a sight which makes him pardon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The absence of that more sublime construction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mixes up vines⁠—olives⁠—precipices⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glaciers⁠—volcanoes⁠—oranges and ices.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when I think upon a pot of beer⁠—⁠</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I won’t weep!⁠—and so drive on, postilions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the smart boys spurred fast in their career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan admired these highways of free millions⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A country in all senses the most dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To foreigner or native, save some silly ones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who “kick against the pricks” just at this juncture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their pains get only a fresh puncture.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-849" id="noteref-849" epub:type="noteref">849</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What a delightful thing’s a turnpike road!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So smooth, so level, such a mode of shaving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Earth, as scarce the eagle in the broad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Air can accomplish, with his wide wings waving.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had such been cut in Phaeton’s time, the god</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had told his son to satisfy his craving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the York mail;⁠—but onward as we roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Surgit amari aliquid</i>⁠—the toll!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-850" id="noteref-850" epub:type="noteref">850</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! how deeply painful is all payment!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take lives⁠—take wives⁠—take aught except men’s purses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Machiavel shows those in purple raiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is the shortest way to general curses.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-851" id="noteref-851" epub:type="noteref">851</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hate a murderer much less than a claimant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that sweet ore which everybody nurses.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kill a man’s family, and he may brook it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But keep your hands out of his breeches’ pocket:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So said the Florentine: ye monarchs, hearken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To your instructor. Juan now was borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as the day began to wane and darken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the high hill, which looks with pride or scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the great city.⁠—Ye who have a spark in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your veins of Cockney spirit, smile or mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According as you take things well or ill;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bold Britons, we are now on Shooter’s Hill!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Sun went down, the smoke rose up, as from</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A half-unquenched volcano, o’er a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which well beseemed the “Devil’s drawing-room,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As some have qualified that wondrous place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan felt, though not approaching <em>Home</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As one who, though he were not of the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revered the soil, of those true sons the mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who butchered half the earth, and bullied t’ other.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-852" id="noteref-852" epub:type="noteref">852</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A mighty mass of brick, and smoke, and shipping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dirty and dusky, but as wide as eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could reach, with here and there a sail just skipping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sight, then lost amidst the forestry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of masts; a wilderness of steeples peeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On tiptoe through their sea-coal canopy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huge, dun Cupola, like a foolscap crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a fool’s head⁠—and there is London Town!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan saw not this: each wreath of smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Appeared to him but as the magic vapour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some alchymic furnace, from whence broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wealth of worlds (a wealth of tax and paper):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gloomy clouds, which o’er it as a yoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are bowed, and put the Sun out like a taper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were nothing but the natural atmosphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extremely wholesome, though but rarely clear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He paused⁠—and so will I; as doth a crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they give their broadside. By and by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gentle countrymen, we will renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our old acquaintance; and at least I’ll try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell you truths <em>you</em> will not take as true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they are so;⁠—a male <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-853" id="noteref-853" epub:type="noteref">853</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a soft besom will I sweep your halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brush a web or two from off the walls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fry! Why go to Newgate? Why</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Preach to <em>poor</em> rogues? And wherefore not begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Carlton, or with other houses? Try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your hand at hardened and imperial Sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mend the People’s an absurdity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jargon, a mere philanthropic din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless you make their betters better:⁠—Fie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought you had more religion, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Teach <em>them</em> the decencies of good threescore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cure <em>them</em> of tours, hussar and highland dresses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell <em>them</em> that youth once gone returns no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That hired huzzas redeem no land’s distresses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell them Sir William Curtis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-854" id="noteref-854" epub:type="noteref">854</a> is a bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too dull even for the dullest of excesses⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The witless Falstaff of a hoary Hal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fool whose bells have ceased to ring at all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-n">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tell them, though it may be, perhaps, too late⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On Life’s worn confine, jaded, bloated, sated⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set up vain pretence of being <em>great</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is not so to be <em>good</em>; and, be it stated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worthiest kings have ever loved least state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell them⁠—But you won’t, and I have prated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now enough; but, by and by, I’ll prattle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Roland’s horn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-855" id="noteref-855" epub:type="noteref">855</a> in Roncesvalles’ battle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-856" id="noteref-856" epub:type="noteref">856</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-857" id="noteref-857" epub:type="noteref">857</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
