<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto XI</h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When Bishop Berkeley said "there was no matter,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_562">[562]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And proved it—'t was no matter what he said:</p>
					<p>They say his system 't is in vain to batter,</p>
					<p class="i2">Too subtle for the airiest human head;</p>
					<p>And yet who can believe it? I would shatter</p>
					<p class="i2">Gladly all matters down to stone or lead,</p>
					<p>Or adamant, to find the World a spirit,</p>
					<p>And wear my head, denying that I wear it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What a sublime discovery 't was to make the</p>
					<p class="i2">Universe universal egotism,</p>
					<p>That all's ideal—<i>all ourselves!</i>—I'll stake the</p>
					<p class="i2">World (be it what you will) that <i>that's</i> no schism.</p>
					<p>Oh Doubt!—if thou be'st Doubt, for which some take thee,</p>
					<p class="i2">But which I doubt extremely—thou sole prism</p>
					<p>Of the Truth's rays, spoil not my draught of spirit!</p>
					<p>Heaven's brandy, though our brain can hardly bear it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For ever and anon comes Indigestion</p>
					<p class="i2">(Not the most "dainty Ariel"),<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_563">[563]</a> and perplexes</p>
					<p>Our soarings with another sort of question:</p>
					<p class="i2">And that which after all my spirit vexes,</p>
					<p>Is, that I find no spot where Man can rest eye on,</p>
					<p class="i2">Without confusion of the sorts and sexes,</p>
					<p>Of Beings, Stars, and this unriddled wonder,</p>
					<p>The World, which at the worst's a <i>glorious</i> blunder—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If it be chance—or, if it be according</p>
					<p class="i2">To the old text, still better:—lest it should</p>
					<p>Turn out so, we 'll say nothing 'gainst the wording,</p>
					<p class="i2">As several people think such hazards rude.</p>
					<p>They're right; our days are too brief for affording</p>
					<p class="i2">Space to dispute what <i>no one</i> ever could</p>
					<p>Decide, and <i>everybody one day</i> will</p>
					<p>Know very clearly—or at least lie still.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And therefore will I leave off metaphysical</p>
					<p class="i2">Discussion, which is neither here nor there:</p>
					<p>If I agree that what is, is; then this I call</p>
					<p class="i2">Being quite perspicuous and extremely fair;</p>
					<p>The truth is, I've grown lately rather phthisical:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_564">[564]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">I don't know what the reason is—the air</p>
					<p>Perhaps; but as I suffer from the shocks</p>
					<p>Of illness, I grow much more orthodox.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The first attack at once proved the Divinity</p>
					<p class="i2">(But that I never doubted, nor the Devil);</p>
					<p>The next, the Virgin's mystical virginity;</p>
					<p class="i2">The third, the usual Origin of Evil;</p>
					<p>The fourth at once established the whole Trinity</p>
					<p class="i2">On so uncontrovertible a level,</p>
					<p>That I devoutly wished the three were four—</p>
					<p>On purpose to believe so much the more.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>To our theme.—The man who has stood on the Acropolis,</p>
					<p class="i2">And looked down over Attica; or he</p>
					<p>Who has sailed where picturesque Constantinople is,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or seen Timbuctoo, or hath taken tea</p>
					<p>In small-eyed China's crockery-ware metropolis,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or sat amidst the bricks of Nineveh,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KK">[KK]</a></p>
					<p>May not think much of London's first appearance—</p>
					<p>But ask him what he thinks of it a year hence!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan had got out on Shooter's Hill;</p>
					<p class="i2">Sunset the time, the place the same declivity</p>
					<p>Which looks along that vale of Good and Ill</p>
					<p class="i2">Where London streets ferment in full activity,</p>
					<p>While everything around was calm and still,</p>
					<p class="i2">Except the creak of wheels, which on their pivot he</p>
					<p>Heard,—and that bee-like, bubbling, busy hum</p>
					<p>Of cities, that boil over with their scum:—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I say, Don Juan, wrapped in contemplation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Walked on behind his carriage, o'er the summit,</p>
					<p>And lost in wonder of so great a nation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Gave way to 't, since he could not overcome it.</p>
					<p>"And here," he cried, "is Freedom's chosen station;</p>
					<p class="i2">Here peals the People's voice, nor can entomb it</p>
					<p>Racks—prisons—inquisitions; Resurrection</p>
					<p>Awaits it, each new meeting or election.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Here are chaste wives, pure lives; here people pay</p>
					<p class="i2">But what they please; and if that things be dear,</p>
					<p>'T is only that they love to throw away</p>
					<p class="i2">Their cash, to show how much they have a-year.</p>
					<p>Here laws are all inviolate—none lay</p>
					<p class="i2">Traps for the traveller—every highway's clear—</p>
					<p>Here"—he was interrupted by a knife,</p>
					<p>With—"Damn your eyes! your money or your life!"—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>These free-born sounds proceeded from four pads</p>
					<p class="i2">In ambush laid, who had perceived him loiter</p>
					<p>Behind his carriage; and, like handy lads,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had seized the lucky hour to reconnoitre,</p>
					<p>In which the heedless gentleman who gads</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon the road, unless he prove a fighter,</p>
					<p>May find himself within that isle of riches</p>
					<p>Exposed to lose his life as well as breeches.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan, who did not understand a word</p>
					<p class="i2">Of English, save their shibboleth, "God damn!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_565">[565]</a></p>
					<p>And even that he had so rarely heard,</p>
					<p class="i2">He sometimes thought 't was only their "Salām,"</p>
					<p>Or "God be with you!"—and 't is not absurd</p>
					<p class="i2">To think so,—for half English as I am</p>
					<p>(To my misfortune), never can I say</p>
					<p>I heard them wish "God with you," save that way;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan yet quickly understood their gesture,</p>
					<p class="i2">And being somewhat choleric and sudden,</p>
					<p>Drew forth a pocket pistol from his vesture,</p>
					<p class="i2">And fired it into one assailant's pudding—</p>
					<p>Who fell, as rolls an ox o'er in his pasture,</p>
					<p class="i2">And roared out, as he writhed his native mud in,</p>
					<p>Unto his nearest follower or henchman,</p>
					<p>"Oh Jack! I'm floored by that 'ere bloody Frenchman!"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>On which Jack and his train set off at speed,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan's suite, late scattered at a distance,</p>
					<p>Came up, all marvelling at such a deed,</p>
					<p class="i2">And offering, as usual, late assistance.</p>
					<p>Juan, who saw the moon's late minion<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_566">[566]</a> bleed</p>
					<p class="i2">As if his veins would pour out his existence,</p>
					<p>Stood calling out for bandages and lint,</p>
					<p>And wished he had been less hasty with his flint.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Perhaps," thought he, "it is the country's wont</p>
					<p class="i2">To welcome foreigners in this way: now</p>
					<p>I recollect some innkeepers who don't</p>
					<p class="i2">Differ, except in robbing with a bow,</p>
					<p>In lieu of a bare blade and brazen front—</p>
					<p class="i2">But what is to be done? I can't allow</p>
					<p>The fellow to lie groaning on the road:</p>
					<p>So take him up—I'll help you with the load."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But ere they could perform this pious duty,</p>
					<p class="i2">The dying man cried, "Hold! I've got my gruel!</p>
					<p>Oh! for a glass of <i>max</i>!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_567">[567]</a> We've missed our booty;</p>
					<p class="i2">Let me die where I am!" And as the fuel</p>
					<p>Of Life shrunk in his heart, and thick and sooty</p>
					<p class="i2">The drops fell from his death-wound, and he drew ill</p>
					<p>His breath,—he from his swelling throat untied</p>
					<p>A kerchief, crying, "Give Sal that!"—and died.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The cravat stained with bloody drops fell down</p>
					<p class="i2">Before Don Juan's feet: he could not tell</p>
					<p>Exactly why it was before him thrown,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor what the meaning of the man's farewell.</p>
					<p>Poor Tom was once a kiddy upon town,</p>
					<p class="i2">A thorough varmint, and a <i>real</i> swell,</p>
					<p>Full flash,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_568">[568]</a> all fancy, until fairly diddled,</p>
					<p>His pockets first and then his body riddled.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan, having done the best he could</p>
					<p class="i2">In all the circumstances of the case,</p>
					<p>As soon as "Crowner's quest"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_569">[569]</a> allowed, pursued</p>
					<p class="i2">His travels to the capital apace;—</p>
					<p>Esteeming it a little hard he should</p>
					<p class="i2">In twelve hours' time, and very little space,</p>
					<p>Have been obliged to slay a free-born native</p>
					<p>In self-defence: this made him meditative.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He from the world had cut off a great man,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who in his time had made heroic bustle.</p>
					<p>Who in a row like Tom could lead the van,</p>
					<p class="i2">Booze in the ken, or at the spellken hustle?</p>
					<p>Who queer a flat?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_570">[570]</a> Who (spite of Bow-street's ban)</p>
					<p class="i2">On the high toby-spice so flash the muzzle?</p>
					<p>Who on a lark with black-eyed Sal (his blowing),</p>
					<p>So prime—so swell—so nutty—and so knowing?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KL">[KL]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_571">[571]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Tom's no more—and so no more of Tom.</p>
					<p class="i2">Heroes must die; and by God's blessing 't is</p>
					<p>Not long before the most of them go home.</p>
					<p class="i2">Hail! Thamis, hail! Upon thy verge it is</p>
					<p>That Juan's chariot, rolling like a drum</p>
					<p class="i2">In thunder, holds the way it can't well miss,</p>
					<p>Through Kennington and all the other "tons,"</p>
					<p>Which make us wish ourselves in town at once;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Through Groves, so called as being void of trees,</p>
					<p class="i2">(Like <i>lucus</i> from <i>no</i> light); through prospects named</p>
					<p>Mount Pleasant, as containing nought to please,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor much to climb; through little boxes framed</p>
					<p>Of bricks, to let the dust in at your ease,</p>
					<p class="i2">With "To be let," upon their doors proclaimed;</p>
					<p>Through "Rows" most modestly called "Paradise,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_572">[572]</a></p>
					<p>Which Eve might quit without much sacrifice;—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KM">[KM]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Through coaches, drays, choked turnpikes, and a whirl</p>
					<p class="i2">Of wheels, and roar of voices, and confusion;</p>
					<p>Here taverns wooing to a pint of "purl,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_573">[573]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">There mails fast flying off like a delusion;</p>
					<p>There barbers' blocks with periwigs in curl</p>
					<p class="i2">In windows; here the lamplighter's infusion</p>
					<p>Slowly distilled into the glimmering glass</p>
					<p>(For in those days we had not got to gas—);<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KN">[KN]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_574">[574]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Through this, and much, and more, is the approach</p>
					<p class="i2">Of travellers to mighty Babylon:</p>
					<p>Whether they come by horse, or chaise, or coach,</p>
					<p class="i2">With slight exceptions, all the ways seem one.</p>
					<p>I could say more, but do not choose to encroach</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon the Guide-book's privilege. The Sun</p>
					<p>Had set some time, and night was on the ridge</p>
					<p>Of twilight, as the party crossed the bridge.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>That's rather fine, the gentle sound of Thamis—</p>
					<p class="i2">Who vindicates a moment, too, his stream—</p>
					<p>Though hardly heard through multifarious "damme's:"</p>
					<p class="i2">The lamps of Westminster's more regular gleam,</p>
					<p>The breadth of pavement, and yon shrine where Fame is</p>
					<p class="i2">A spectral resident—whose pallid beam</p>
					<p>In shape of moonshine hovers o'er the pile—</p>
					<p>Make this a sacred part of Albion's isle.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Druids' groves are gone—so much the better:</p>
					<p class="i2">Stonehenge is not—but what the devil is it?—</p>
					<p>But Bedlam still exists with its sage fetter,</p>
					<p class="i2">That madmen may not bite you on a visit;</p>
					<p>The Bench too seats or suits full many a debtor;</p>
					<p class="i2">The Mansion House,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_575">[575]</a> too (though some people quiz it),</p>
					<p>To me appears a stiff yet grand erection;</p>
					<p>But then the Abbey's worth the whole collection.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The line of lights,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_576">[576]</a> too, up to Charing Cross,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pall Mall, and so forth, have a coruscation</p>
					<p>Like gold as in comparison to dross,</p>
					<p class="i2">Matched with the Continent's illumination,</p>
					<p>Whose cities Night by no means deigns to gloss.</p>
					<p class="i2">The French were not yet a lamp-lighting nation,</p>
					<p>And when they grew so—on their new-found lantern,</p>
					<p>Instead of wicks, they made a wicked man turn.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_577">[577]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A row of Gentlemen along the streets</p>
					<p class="i2">Suspended may illuminate mankind,</p>
					<p>As also bonfires made of country seats;</p>
					<p class="i2">But the old way is best for the purblind:</p>
					<p>The other looks like phosphorus on sheets,</p>
					<p class="i2">A sort of <i>ignis fatuus</i> to the mind,</p>
					<p>Which, though 't is certain to perplex and frighten,</p>
					<p>Must burn more mildly ere it can enlighten.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But London's so well lit, that if Diogenes</p>
					<p class="i2">Could recommence to hunt his <i>honest man</i>,</p>
					<p>And found him not amidst the various progenies</p>
					<p class="i2">Of this enormous City's spreading span,</p>
					<p>'T were not for want of lamps to aid his dodging his</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet undiscovered treasure. What <i>I</i> can,</p>
					<p>I've done to find the same throughout Life's journey,</p>
					<p>But see the World is only one attorney.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Over the stones still rattling, up Pall Mall,</p>
					<p class="i2">Through crowds and carriages, but waxing thinner</p>
					<p>As thundered knockers broke the long sealed spell</p>
					<p class="i2">Of doors 'gainst duns, and to an early dinner</p>
					<p>Admitted a small party as night fell,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Don Juan, our young diplomatic sinner,</p>
					<p>Pursued his path, and drove past some hotels,</p>
					<p>St. James's Palace, and St. James's "Hells."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_578">[578]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They reached the hotel: forth streamed from the front door<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KO">[KO]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A tide of well-clad waiters, and around</p>
					<p>The mob stood, and as usual several score</p>
					<p class="i2">Of those pedestrian Paphians who abound</p>
					<p>In decent London when the daylight's o'er;</p>
					<p class="i2">Commodious but immoral, they are found</p>
					<p>Useful, like Malthus, in promoting marriage.—</p>
					<p>But Juan now is stepping from his carriage</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Into one of the sweetest of hotels,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KP">[KP]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_579">[579]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Especially for foreigners—and mostly</p>
					<p>For those whom favour or whom Fortune swells,</p>
					<p class="i2">And cannot find a bill's small items costly.</p>
					<p>There many an envoy either dwelt or dwells</p>
					<p class="i2">(The den of many a diplomatic lost lie),</p>
					<p>Until to some conspicuous square they pass,</p>
					<p>And blazon o'er the door their names in brass.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan, whose was a delicate commission,</p>
					<p class="i2">Private, though publicly important, bore</p>
					<p>No title to point out with due precision</p>
					<p class="i2">The exact affair on which he was sent o'er.</p>
					<p>'T was merely known, that on a secret mission</p>
					<p class="i2">A foreigner of rank had graced our shore,</p>
					<p>Young, handsome, and accomplished, who was said</p>
					<p>(In whispers) to have turned his Sovereign's head.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some rumour also of some strange adventures</p>
					<p class="i2">Had gone before him, and his wars and loves;</p>
					<p>And as romantic heads are pretty painters,</p>
					<p class="i2">And, above all, an Englishwoman's roves<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KQ">[KQ]</a></p>
					<p>Into the excursive, breaking the indentures</p>
					<p class="i2">Of sober reason, wheresoe'er it moves,</p>
					<p>He found himself extremely in the fashion,</p>
					<p>Which serves our thinking people for a passion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I don't mean that they are passionless, but quite</p>
					<p class="i2">The contrary; but then 't is in the head;</p>
					<p>Yet as the consequences are as bright</p>
					<p class="i2">As if they acted with the heart instead,</p>
					<p>What after all can signify the site</p>
					<p class="i2">Of ladies' lucubrations? So they lead</p>
					<p>In safety to the place for which you start,</p>
					<p>What matters if the road be head or heart?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan presented in the proper place,</p>
					<p class="i2">To proper placemen, every Russ credential;</p>
					<p>And was received with all the due grimace</p>
					<p class="i2">By those who govern in the mood potential,</p>
					<p>Who, seeing a handsome stripling with smooth face,</p>
					<p class="i2">Thought (what in state affairs is most essential),</p>
					<p>That they as easily might <i>do</i> the youngster,</p>
					<p>As hawks may pounce upon a woodland songster.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They erred, as agéd men will do; but by</p>
					<p class="i2">And by we'll talk of that; and if we don't,</p>
					<p>'T will be because our notion is not high</p>
					<p class="i2">Of politicians and their double front,</p>
					<p>Who live by lies, yet dare not boldly lie:—</p>
					<p class="i2">Now what I love in women is, they won't</p>
					<p>Or can't do otherwise than lie—but do it</p>
					<p>So well, the very Truth seems falsehood to it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And, after all, what is a lie? 'T is but</p>
					<p class="i2">The truth in masquerade; and I defy<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KR">[KR]</a></p>
					<p>Historians—heroes—lawyers—priests, to put</p>
					<p class="i2">A fact without some leaven of a lie.</p>
					<p>The very shadow of true Truth would shut</p>
					<p class="i2">Up annals—revelations—poesy,</p>
					<p>And prophecy—except it should be dated</p>
					<p>Some years before the incidents related.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Praised be all liars and all lies! Who now</p>
					<p class="i2">Can tax my mild Muse with misanthropy?</p>
					<p>She rings the World's "Te Deum," and her brow</p>
					<p class="i2">Blushes for those who will not:—but to sigh</p>
					<p>Is idle; let us like most others bow,</p>
					<p class="i2">Kiss hands—feet—any part of Majesty,</p>
					<p>After the good example of "Green Erin,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_580">[580]</a></p>
					<p>Whose shamrock now seems rather worse for wearing.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KS">[KS]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan was presented, and his dress</p>
					<p class="i2">And mien excited general admiration—</p>
					<p>I don't know which was more admired or less:</p>
					<p class="i2">One monstrous diamond drew much observation,</p>
					<p>Which Catherine in a moment of <i>"ivresse"</i></p>
					<p class="i2">(In Love or Brandy's fervent fermentation),</p>
					<p>Bestowed upon him, as the public learned;</p>
					<p>And, to say truth, it had been fairly earned.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Besides the ministers and underlings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who must be courteous to the accredited</p>
					<p>Diplomatists of rather wavering Kings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until their royal riddle's fully read,</p>
					<p>The very clerks,—those somewhat dirty springs</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Office, or the House of Office, fed</p>
					<p>By foul corruption into streams,—even they</p>
					<p>Were hardly rude enough to earn their pay:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And insolence no doubt is what they are</p>
					<p class="i2">Employed for, since it is their daily labour,</p>
					<p>In the dear offices of Peace or War;</p>
					<p class="i2">And should you doubt, pray ask of your next neighbour,</p>
					<p>When for a passport, or some other bar</p>
					<p class="i2">To freedom, he applied (a grief and a bore),</p>
					<p>If he found not this spawn of tax-born riches,</p>
					<p>Like lap-dogs, the least civil sons of b——- s.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Juan was received with much <i>"empressement:"</i>—</p>
					<p class="i2">These phrases of refinement I must borrow</p>
					<p>From our next neighbours' land, where, like a chessman,</p>
					<p class="i2">There is a move set down for joy or sorrow,</p>
					<p>Not only in mere talking, but the press. Man</p>
					<p class="i2">In Islands is, it seems, downright and thorough,</p>
					<p>More than on Continents—as if the Sea</p>
					<p>(See Billingsgate) made even the tongue more free.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And yet the British "Damme"'s rather Attic,</p>
					<p class="i2">Your continental oaths are but incontinent,</p>
					<p>And turn on things which no aristocratic</p>
					<p class="i2">Spirit would name, and therefore even I won't anent<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_581">[581]</a></p>
					<p>This subject quote; as it would be schismatic</p>
					<p class="i2">In <i>politesse</i>, and have a sound affronting in't;—</p>
					<p>But "Damme"'s quite ethereal, though too daring—</p>
					<p>Platonic blasphemy—the soul of swearing.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KT">[KT]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For downright rudeness, ye may stay at home;</p>
					<p class="i2">For true or false politeness (and scarce <i>that</i></p>
					<p><i>Now</i>) you may cross the blue deep and white foam—</p>
					<p class="i2">The first the emblem (rarely though) of what</p>
					<p>You leave behind, the next of much you come</p>
					<p class="i2">To meet. However, 't is no time to chat</p>
					<p>On general topics: poems must confine</p>
					<p>Themselves to unity, like this of mine.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KU">[KU]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In the great world,—which, being interpreted,</p>
					<p class="i2">Meaneth the West or worst end of a city,</p>
					<p>And about twice two thousand people bred</p>
					<p class="i2">By no means to be very wise or witty,</p>
					<p>But to sit up while others lie in bed,</p>
					<p class="i2">And look down on the Universe with pity,—</p>
					<p>Juan, as an inveterate patrician,</p>
					<p>Was well received by persons of condition.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was a bachelor, which is a matter</p>
					<p class="i2">Of import both to virgin and to bride,</p>
					<p>The former's hymeneal hopes to flatter;</p>
					<p class="i2">And (should she not hold fast by Love or Pride)</p>
					<p>'T is also of some moment to the latter:</p>
					<p class="i2">A rib's a thorn in a wed gallant's side,</p>
					<p>Requires decorum, and is apt to double</p>
					<p>The horrid sin—and what's still worse, the trouble.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Juan was a bachelor—of arts,</p>
					<p class="i2">And parts, and hearts: he danced and sung, and had</p>
					<p>An air as sentimental as Mozart's</p>
					<p class="i2">Softest of melodies; and could be sad</p>
					<p>Or cheerful, without any "flaws or starts,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_582">[582]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Just at the proper time: and though a lad,</p>
					<p>Had seen the world—which is a curious sight,</p>
					<p>And very much unlike what people write.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fair virgins blushed upon him; wedded dames</p>
					<p class="i2">Bloomed also in less transitory hues;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KV">[KV]</a></p>
					<p>For both commodities dwell by the Thames,</p>
					<p class="i2">The painting and the painted; Youth, Ceruse,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KW">[KW]</a></p>
					<p>Against his heart preferred their usual claims,</p>
					<p class="i2">Such as no gentleman can quite refuse:</p>
					<p>Daughters admired his dress, and pious mothers</p>
					<p>Inquired his income, and if he had brothers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The milliners who furnish "drapery Misses"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_583">[583]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Throughout the season, upon speculation</p>
					<p>Of payment ere the Honeymoon's last kisses</p>
					<p class="i2">Have waned into a crescent's coruscation,</p>
					<p>Thought such an opportunity as this is,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of a rich foreigner's initiation,</p>
					<p>Not to be overlooked—and gave such credit,</p>
					<p>That future bridegrooms swore, and sighed, and paid it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Blues, that tender tribe, who sigh o'er sonnets,</p>
					<p class="i2">And with the pages of the last Review</p>
					<p>Line the interior of their heads or bonnets,</p>
					<p class="i2">Advanced in all their azure's highest hue:</p>
					<p>They talked bad French or Spanish, and upon its</p>
					<p class="i2">Late authors asked him for a hint or two;</p>
					<p>And which was softest, Russian or Castilian?</p>
					<p>And whether in his travels he saw Ilion?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan, who was a little superficial,</p>
					<p class="i2">And not in literature a great Drawcansir,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_584">[584]</a></p>
					<p>Examined by this learnéd and especial</p>
					<p class="i2">Jury of matrons, scarce knew what to answer:</p>
					<p>His duties warlike, loving or official,</p>
					<p class="i2">His steady application as a dancer,</p>
					<p>Had kept him from the brink of Hippocrene,</p>
					<p>Which now he found was blue instead of green.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>However, he replied at hazard, with</p>
					<p class="i2">A modest confidence and calm assurance,</p>
					<p>Which lent his learnéd lucubrations pith,</p>
					<p class="i2">And passed for arguments of good endurance.</p>
					<p>That prodigy, Miss Araminta Smith</p>
					<p class="i2">(Who at sixteen translated "Hercules Furens"</p>
					<p>Into as furious English), with her best look,</p>
					<p>Set down his sayings in her common-place book.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan knew several languages—as well</p>
					<p class="i2">He might—and brought them up with skill, in time</p>
					<p>To save his fame with each accomplished belle,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who still regretted that he did not rhyme.</p>
					<p>There wanted but this requisite to swell</p>
					<p class="i2">His qualities (with them) into sublime:</p>
					<p>Lady Fitz-Frisky, and Miss Maevia Mannish,</p>
					<p>Both longed extremely to be sung in Spanish.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>However, he did pretty well, and was</p>
					<p class="i2">Admitted as an aspirant to all</p>
					<p>The coteries, and, as in Banquo's glass,</p>
					<p class="i2">At great assemblies or in parties small,</p>
					<p>He saw ten thousand living authors pass,</p>
					<p class="i2">That being about their average numeral;</p>
					<p>Also the eighty "greatest living poets,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_585">[585]</a></p>
					<p>As every paltry magazine can show <i>it's</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In twice five years the "greatest living poet,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Like to the champion in the fisty ring,</p>
					<p>Is called on to support his claim, or show it,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although 't is an imaginary thing.</p>
					<p>Even I—albeit I'm sure I did not know it,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor sought of foolscap subjects to be king,—</p>
					<p>Was reckoned, a considerable time,</p>
					<p>The grand Napoleon of the realms of rhyme.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KX">[KX]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Juan was my Moscow, and Faliero</p>
					<p class="i2">My Leipsic, and my Mont Saint Jean seems Cain:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_586">[586]</a></p>
					<p><i>La Belle Alliance</i> of dunces down at zero,</p>
					<p class="i2">Now that the Lion's fallen, may rise again:</p>
					<p>But I will fall at least as fell my Hero;</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor reign at all, or as a <i>monarch</i> reign;</p>
					<p>Or to some lonely isle of gaolers go,</p>
					<p>With turncoat Southey for my turnkey Lowe.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KY">[KY]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sir Walter reigned before me; Moore and Campbell</p>
					<p class="i2">Before and after; but now grown more holy,</p>
					<p>The Muses upon Sion's hill must ramble</p>
					<p class="i2">With poets almost clergymen, or wholly;</p>
					<p>And Pegasus has a psalmodic amble</p>
					<p class="i2">Beneath the very Reverend Rowley Powley,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_KZ">[KZ]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_587">[587]</a></p>
					<p>Who shoes the glorious animal with stilts,</p>
					<p>A modern Ancient Pistol—"by these hilts!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_588">[588]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Still he excels that artificial hard</p>
					<p class="i2">Labourer in the same vineyard, though the vine</p>
					<p>Yields him but vinegar for his reward.—</p>
					<p class="i2">That neutralised dull Dorus of the Nine;</p>
					<p>That swarthy Sporus, neither man nor bard;</p>
					<p class="i2">That ox of verse, who <i>ploughs</i> for every line:—</p>
					<p>Cambyses' roaring Romans beat at least</p>
					<p>The howling Hebrews of Cybele's priest.—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_589">[589]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then there's my gentle Euphues,—who, they say,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LA">[LA]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Sets up for being a sort of <i>moral me</i>;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_590">[590]</a></p>
					<p>He'll find it rather difficult some day</p>
					<p class="i2">To turn out both, or either, it may be.</p>
					<p>Some persons think that Coleridge hath the sway;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Wordsworth has supporters, two or three;</p>
					<p>And that deep-mouthed Boeotian "Savage Landor"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_591">[591]</a></p>
					<p>Has taken for a swan rogue Southey's gander.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>John Keats, who was killed off by one critique,</p>
					<p class="i2">Just as he really promised something great,</p>
					<p>If not intelligible, without Greek</p>
					<p class="i2">Contrived to talk about the gods of late,</p>
					<p>Much as they might have been supposed to speak.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_592">[592]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Poor fellow! His was an untoward fate;</p>
					<p>'T is strange the mind, that very fiery particle,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LB">[LB]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_593">[593]</a></p>
					<p>Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The list grows long of live and dead pretenders</p>
					<p class="i2">To that which none will gain—or none will know</p>
					<p>The conqueror at least; who, ere Time renders</p>
					<p class="i2">His last award, will have the long grass grow</p>
					<p>Above his burnt-out brain, and sapless cinders.</p>
					<p class="i2">If I might augur, I should rate but low</p>
					<p>Their chances;—they're too numerous, like the thirty<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_594">[594]</a></p>
					<p>Mock tyrants, when Rome's annals waxed but dirty.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This is the literary <i>lower</i> empire,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where the praetorian bands take up the matter;—</p>
					<p>A "dreadful trade," like his who "gathers samphire,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_595">[595]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The insolent soldiery to soothe and flatter,</p>
					<p>With the same feelings as you'd coax a vampire.</p>
					<p class="i2">Now, were I once at home, and in good satire,</p>
					<p>I'd try conclusions with those Janizaries,</p>
					<p>And show them <i>what</i> an intellectual war is.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I think I know a trick or two, would turn</p>
					<p class="i2">Their flanks;—but it is hardly worth my while,</p>
					<p>With such small gear to give myself concern:</p>
					<p class="i2">Indeed I've not the necessary bile;</p>
					<p>My natural temper's really aught but stern,</p>
					<p class="i2">And even my Muse's worst reproof's a smile;</p>
					<p>And then she drops a brief and modern curtsy,</p>
					<p>And glides away, assured she never hurts ye.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>My Juan, whom I left in deadly peril</p>
					<p class="i2">Amongst live poets and <i>blue</i> ladies, passed</p>
					<p>With some small profit through that field so sterile,</p>
					<p class="i2">Being tired in time—and, neither least nor last,</p>
					<p>Left it before he had been treated very ill;</p>
					<p class="i2">And henceforth found himself more gaily classed</p>
					<p>Amongst the higher spirits of the day,</p>
					<p>The Sun's true son, no vapour, but a ray.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His morns he passed in business—which dissected,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was, like all business, a laborious nothing</p>
					<p>That leads to lassitude, the most infected</p>
					<p class="i2">And Centaur Nessus garb of mortal clothing,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_596">[596]</a></p>
					<p>And on our sofas makes us lie dejected,</p>
					<p class="i2">And talk in tender horrors of our loathing</p>
					<p>All kinds of toil, save for our country's good—</p>
					<p>Which grows no better, though 't is time it should.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His afternoons he passed in visits, luncheons,</p>
					<p class="i2">Lounging and boxing; and the twilight hour</p>
					<p>In riding round those vegetable puncheons</p>
					<p class="i2">Called "Parks," where there is neither fruit nor flower</p>
					<p>Enough to gratify a bee's slight munchings;</p>
					<p class="i2">But after all it is the only "bower"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_597">[597]</a></p>
					<p>(In Moore's phrase) where the fashionable fair</p>
					<p>Can form a slight acquaintance with fresh air.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then dress, then dinner, then awakes the world!</p>
					<p class="i2">Then glare the lamps, then whirl the wheels, then roar</p>
					<p>Through street and square fast flashing chariots hurled</p>
					<p class="i2">Like harnessed meteors; then along the floor</p>
					<p>Chalk mimics painting; then festoons are twirled;</p>
					<p class="i2">Then roll the brazen thunders of the door,</p>
					<p>Which opens to the thousand happy few</p>
					<p>An earthly Paradise of <i>Or Molu</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There stands the noble hostess, nor shall sink</p>
					<p class="i2">With the three-thousandth curtsy; there the waltz,</p>
					<p>The only dance which teaches girls to think,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_598">[598]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Makes one in love even with its very faults.</p>
					<p>Saloon, room, hall, o'erflow beyond their brink,</p>
					<p class="i2">And long the latest of arrivals halts,</p>
					<p>'Midst royal dukes and dames condemned to climb,</p>
					<p>And gain an inch of staircase at a time.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thrice happy he who, after a survey</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the good company, can win a corner,</p>
					<p>A door that's <i>in</i> or boudoir <i>out</i> of the way,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where he may fix himself like small "Jack Horner,"</p>
					<p>And let the Babel round run as it may,</p>
					<p class="i2">And look on as a mourner, or a scorner,</p>
					<p>Or an approver, or a mere spectator,</p>
					<p>Yawning a little as the night grows later.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But this won't do, save by and by; and he</p>
					<p class="i2">Who, like Don Juan, takes an active share,</p>
					<p>Must steer with care through all that glittering sea</p>
					<p class="i2">Of gems and plumes and pearls and silks, to where</p>
					<p>He deems it is his proper place to be;</p>
					<p class="i2">Dissolving in the waltz to some soft air,</p>
					<p>Or proudlier prancing with mercurial skill,</p>
					<p>Where Science marshals forth her own quadrille.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Or, if he dance not, but hath higher views</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon an heiress or his neighbour's bride,</p>
					<p>Let him take care that that which he pursues</p>
					<p class="i2">Is not at once too palpably descried:</p>
					<p>Full many an eager gentleman oft rues</p>
					<p class="i2">His haste; Impatience is a blundering guide</p>
					<p>Amongst a people famous for reflection,</p>
					<p>Who like to play the fool with circumspection.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But, if you can contrive, get next at supper;</p>
					<p class="i2">Or, if forestalled, get opposite and ogle:—</p>
					<p>Oh, ye ambrosial moments! always upper</p>
					<p class="i2">In mind, a sort of sentimental bogle,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_599">[599]</a></p>
					<p>Which sits for ever upon Memory's crupper,</p>
					<p class="i2">The ghost of vanished pleasures once in vogue! Ill</p>
					<p>Can tender souls relate the rise and fall</p>
					<p>Of hopes and fears which shake a single ball.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But these precautionary hints can touch</p>
					<p class="i2">Only the common run, who must pursue,</p>
					<p>And watch and ward; whose plans a word too much</p>
					<p class="i2">Or little overturns; and not the few</p>
					<p>Or many (for the number's sometimes such)</p>
					<p class="i2">Whom a good mien, especially if new,</p>
					<p>Or fame—or name—for Wit, War, Sense, or Nonsense,</p>
					<p>Permits whate'er they please,—or <i>did</i> not long since.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Our Hero—as a hero—young and handsome,</p>
					<p class="i2">Noble, rich, celebrated, and a stranger,</p>
					<p>Like other slaves of course must pay his ransom,</p>
					<p class="i2">Before he can escape from so much danger</p>
					<p>As will environ a conspicuous man. Some</p>
					<p class="i2">Talk about poetry, and "rack and manger,"</p>
					<p>And ugliness, disease, as toil and trouble;—</p>
					<p>I wish they knew the life of a young noble.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They are young, but know not Youth—it is anticipated;</p>
					<p class="i2">Handsome but wasted, rich without a sou;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LC">[LC]</a></p>
					<p>Their vigour in a thousand arms is dissipated;</p>
					<p class="i2">Their cash comes <i>from</i>, their wealth goes <i>to</i> a Jew;</p>
					<p>Both senates see their nightly votes participated</p>
					<p class="i2">Between the Tyrant's and the Tribunes' crew;</p>
					<p>And having voted, dined, drunk, gamed, and whored,</p>
					<p>The family vault receives another Lord.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Where is the World?" cries Young, at <i>eighty</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_600">[600]</a>—"Where</p>
					<p class="i2">The World in which a man was born?" Alas!</p>
					<p>Where is the world of <i>eight</i> years past? <i>'T was there</i>—</p>
					<p class="i2">I look for it—'t is gone, a globe of glass!</p>
					<p>Cracked, shivered, vanished, scarcely gazed on, ere<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LD">[LD]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A silent change dissolves the glittering mass.</p>
					<p>Statesmen, Chiefs, Orators, Queens, Patriots, Kings,</p>
					<p>And Dandies—all are gone on the Wind's wings.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Where is Napoleon the Grand? God knows!</p>
					<p class="i2">Where little Castlereagh? The devil can tell!</p>
					<p>Where Grattan, Curran, Sheridan—all those</p>
					<p class="i2">Who bound the Bar or Senate in their spell?</p>
					<p>Where is the unhappy Queen, with all her woes?</p>
					<p class="i2">And where the Daughter, whom the Isles loved well?</p>
					<p>Where are those martyred saints the Five per Cents?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LE">[LE]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_601">[601]</a></p>
					<p>And where—oh, where the devil are the Rents?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Where's Brummell? Dished. Where's Long Pole Wellesley?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_602">[602]</a> Diddled.</p>
					<p class="i2">Where's Whitbread? Romilly? Where's George the Third?</p>
					<p>Where is his will?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_603">[603]</a> (That's not so soon unriddled.)</p>
					<p class="i2">And where is "Fum" the Fourth, our "royal bird?"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_604">[604]</a></p>
					<p>Gone down, it seems, to Scotland to be fiddled</p>
					<p class="i2">Unto by Sawney's violin, we have heard:</p>
					<p>"Caw me, caw thee"—for six months hath been hatching</p>
					<p>This scene of royal itch and loyal scratching.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Where is Lord This? And where my Lady That?</p>
					<p class="i2">The Honourable Mistresses and Misses?</p>
					<p>Some laid aside like an old Opera hat,</p>
					<p class="i2">Married, unmarried, and remarried: (this is</p>
					<p>An evolution oft performed of late).</p>
					<p class="i2">Where are the Dublin shouts—and London hisses?</p>
					<p>Where are the Grenvilles? Turned as usual. Where</p>
					<p>My friends the Whigs? Exactly where they were.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Where are the Lady Carolines and Franceses?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_605">[605]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Divorced or doing thereanent. Ye annals</p>
					<p>So brilliant, where the list of routs and dances is,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Thou Morning Post, sole record of the panels</p>
					<p>Broken in carriages, and all the phantasies</p>
					<p class="i2">Of fashion,—say what streams now fill those channels?</p>
					<p>Some die, some fly, some languish on the Continent,</p>
					<p>Because the times have hardly left them <i>one</i> tenant.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some who once set their caps at cautious dukes,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LF">[LF]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Have taken up at length with younger brothers:</p>
					<p>Some heiresses have bit at sharpers' hooks:</p>
					<p class="i2">Some maids have been made wives, some merely mothers:</p>
					<p>Others have lost their fresh and fairy looks:</p>
					<p class="i2">In short, the list of alterations bothers.</p>
					<p>There's little strange in this, but something strange is</p>
					<p>The unusual quickness of these common changes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Talk not of seventy years as age; in seven</p>
					<p class="i2">I have seen more changes, down from monarchs to</p>
					<p>The humblest individuals under Heaven,</p>
					<p class="i2">Than might suffice a moderate century through.</p>
					<p>I knew that nought was lasting, but now even</p>
					<p class="i2">Change grows too changeable, without being new:</p>
					<p>Nought's permanent among the human race,</p>
					<p>Except the Whigs <i>not</i> getting into place.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I have seen Napoleon, who seemed quite a Jupiter,</p>
					<p class="i2">Shrink to a Saturn. I have seen a Duke</p>
					<p>(No matter which) turn politician stupider,</p>
					<p class="i2">If that can well be, than his wooden look.</p>
					<p>But it is time that I should hoist my "blue Peter,"</p>
					<p class="i2">And sail for a new theme:—I have seen—and shook</p>
					<p>To see it—the King hissed, and then caressed;</p>
					<p>But don't pretend to settle which was best.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I have seen the Landholders without a rap—</p>
					<p class="i2">I have seen Joanna Southcote—I have seen</p>
					<p>The House of Commons turned to a tax-trap—</p>
					<p class="i2">I have seen that sad affair of the late Queen—</p>
					<p>I have seen crowns worn instead of a fool's cap—</p>
					<p class="i2">I have seen a Congress<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_606">[606]</a> doing all that's mean—</p>
					<p>I have seen some nations, like o'erloaded asses,</p>
					<p>Kick off their burthens—meaning the high classes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I have seen small poets, and great prosers, and</p>
					<p class="i2">Interminable—<i>not eternal</i>—speakers—</p>
					<p>I have seen the funds at war with house and land—</p>
					<p class="i2">I have seen the country gentlemen turn squeakers—</p>
					<p>I have seen the people ridden o'er like sand</p>
					<p class="i2">By slaves on horseback—I have seen malt liquors</p>
					<p>Exchanged for "thin potations"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_607">[607]</a> by John Bull—</p>
					<p>I have seen John half detect himself a fool.—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But <i>"carpe diem,"</i> Juan, <i>"carpe, carpe!"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_608">[608]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">To-morrow sees another race as gay</p>
					<p>And transient, and devoured by the same harpy.</p>
					<p class="i2">"Life's a poor player,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_609">[609]</a>—then "play out the play,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_610">[610]</a></p>
					<p>Ye villains!" and above all keep a sharp eye</p>
					<p class="i2">Much less on what you do than what you say:</p>
					<p>Be hypocritical, be cautious, be</p>
					<p>Not what you <i>seem</i>, but always what you <i>see</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But how shall I relate in other cantos</p>
					<p class="i2">Of what befell our hero in the land,</p>
					<p>Which 't is the common cry and lie to vaunt as</p>
					<p class="i2">A moral country? But I hold my hand—</p>
					<p>For I disdain to write an Atalantis;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_611">[611]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But 't is as well at once to understand,</p>
					<p>You are <i>not</i> a moral people, and you know it,</p>
					<p>Without the aid of too sincere a poet.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What Juan saw and underwent shall be</p>
					<p class="i2">My topic, with of course the due restriction</p>
					<p>Which is required by proper courtesy;</p>
					<p class="i2">And recollect the work is only fiction,</p>
					<p>And that I sing of neither mine nor me,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though every scribe, in some slight turn of diction,</p>
					<p>Will hint allusions never <i>meant</i>. Ne'er doubt</p>
					<p><i>This</i>—when I speak, I <i>don't hint</i>, but <i>speak out</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Whether he married with the third or fourth</p>
					<p class="i2">Offspring of some sage husband-hunting countess,</p>
					<p>Or whether with some virgin of more worth</p>
					<p class="i2">(I mean in Fortune's matrimonial bounties),</p>
					<p>He took to regularly peopling Earth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of which your lawful, awful wedlock fount is,—</p>
					<p>Or whether he was taken in for damages,</p>
					<p>For being too excursive in his homages,—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Is yet within the unread events of Time.</p>
					<p class="i2">Thus far, go forth, thou Lay, which I will back</p>
					<p>Against the same given quantity of rhyme,</p>
					<p class="i2">For being as much the subject of attack</p>
					<p>As ever yet was any work sublime,</p>
					<p class="i2">By those who love to say that white is black.</p>
					<p>So much the better!—I may stand alone,</p>
					<p>But would not change my free thoughts for a throne.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_612">[612]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_562"><span class="label">[562]</span></a> {427}[Berkeley did not deny the reality of existence, but the reality of matter as an abstract conception. "It is plain," he says (<i>On the Principles of Human Knowledge</i>, sect. ix.), "that the very notion of what is called <i>matter</i> or <i>corporeal substance</i>, involves a contradiction in it." Again, "It were a mistake to think that what is here said derogates in the least from the reality of things." His contention was that this <i>reality</i> depended, not on an abstraction <i>called</i> matter, "an inert, extended unperceiving substance," but on "those unextended, indivisible substances or <i>spirits</i>, which act, and think, and perceive them [unthinking beings]."—<i>Ibid.</i>, sect. xci., <i>The Works</i> of George Berkeley, D.D., 1820, i. 27, 69, 70.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_563"><span class="label">[563]</span></a> {428}[<i>Tempest</i>, act v. sc. i, line 95.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_564"><span class="label">[564]</span></a> ["I have been very unwell—four days confined to my bed in 'the worst inn's worst room' at Lerici, with a violent rheumatic and bilious attack, constipation, and the devil knows what."—Letter to Murray, October 9, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 121. The same letter contains an announcement that he had "a fifth [Canto of <i>Don Juan</i>] (the 10th) finished, but not transcribed yet; and the <i>eleventh</i> begun."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KK"><span class="label">[KK]</span></a> {429}<i>Or Rome, or Tiber—Naples or the sea</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_565"><span class="label">[565]</span></a> {430}[<i>Vide ante</i>, <a class="pginternal" href="#c1sxiv">Canto I. stanza xiv</a>. lines 7, 8.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_566"><span class="label">[566]</span></a> {431}["<i>Falstaff</i>. Let us be Diana's foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon: and let men say, we be men of good government; being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we—steal."-<i>I Henry IV.</i>, act i. sc. 2, lines 24-28.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_567"><span class="label">[567]</span></a> [Gin. Hence the antithesis of <i>"All Max"</i> in the East to Almack's in the West. (See <i>Life in London</i>, by Pierce Egan, 1823, pp. 284-290.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_568"><span class="label">[568]</span></a> [According to the <i>Vocabulary of the Flash Language</i>, compiled by James Hardy Vaux, in 1812, and published at the end of his Memoirs, 1819, ii. 149-227, a kiddy, or "flash-kiddy," is a thief of the lower orders, who, when he is <i>breeched</i> by a course of successful depredation dresses in the extreme of vulgar gentility, and affects a knowingness in his air and conversation. A "swell" or "rank swell" ("<i>real</i> swell" appears in Egan's <i>Life in London</i>) is the more recent "toff;" and "flash" is "fly," "down," or "awake," <i>i.e.</i> knowing, not easily imposed upon.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_569"><span class="label">[569]</span></a> {432}[<i>Hamlet</i>, act v. sc. 1, line 21.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_570"><span class="label">[570]</span></a> ["Ken" is a house, s.c. a thieves' lodging-house; "spellken," a play-house; "high toby-spice" is robbery on horseback, as distinguished from "spice," i.e. footpad robbery; to "flash the muzzle" is to show off the face, to swagger openly; "blowing" or "blowen" is a doxy or trull; and "nutty" is, conjointly, amorous and fascinating.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KL">
							<span class="label">[KL]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>Poor Tom was once a knowing one in town</i>.</p>
							<p><i>Not a mere</i> kiddy, <i>but a</i> real <i>one</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_571"><span class="label">[571]</span></a> The advance of science and of language has rendered it unnecessary to translate the above good and true English, spoken in its original purity by the select mobility and their patrons. The following is a stanza of a song which was very popular at least in my early days:—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"On the high toby-spice flash the muzzle,</p>
							<p class="i2">In spite of each gallows old scout;</p>
							<p>If you at the spellken can't hustle,</p>
							<p class="i2">You'll be hobbled in making a clout.</p>
							<p>Then your blowing will wax gallows haughty,</p>
							<p class="i2">When she hears of your scaly mistake,</p>
							<p>She'll surely turn snitch for the forty—</p>
							<p class="i2">That her Jack may be regular weight."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>If there be any gemman so ignorant as to require a traduction, I refer him to my old friend and corporeal pastor and master, John Jackson, Esq., Professor of Pugilism; who, I trust, still retains the strength and symmetry of his model of a form, together with his good humour, and athletic as well as mental accomplishments.</p>
					<p>[Gentleman Jackson was of good renown. "Servility," says Egan (<i>Life in London</i>, 1823, p. 217), "is not known to him. Flattery he detests. Integrity, impartiality, good-nature, and manliness, are the corner-stones of his understanding." Byron once said of him that "his manners were infinitely superior to those of the Fellows of the College whom I meet at the high table" (J.W. Clark, <i>Cambridge</i>, 1890, p. 140). (See, too, letter to John Jackson, September 18, 1808, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 189, note 2; <i>Hints from Horace</i>, line 638, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 433, note 3.) As to the stanza quoted by Egan (<i>Anecdotes of the Turf</i>, 1827, p. 44), but not <i>traduced</i> or interpreted, "To be hobbled for making a clout" is to be taken into custody for stealing a handkerchief, to "turn snitch" is to inform, and the "forty" is the £40 offered for the detection of a capital crime, and shared by the police or Bow Street runners. Dangerous characters were let alone and tacitly encouraged to continue their career of crime, until the measure of their iniquity was full, and they "weighed forty." If Jack was clumsy enough to be detected in a trifling theft, his "blowen" would go over to the enemy, and betray him for the sake of the Government reward (see <i>Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue</i>, by Francis Grose, 1823, art. "Weigh forty").]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_572"><span class="label">[572]</span></a> {433}[Don Juan must have driven by <i>Pleasant Row</i>, and passed within hail of <i>Paradise Row</i>, on the way from Kennington to Westminster Bridge. (See Cary's <i>New Pocket Plan of London, Westminster, and Southwark</i>, 1819.) But, perhaps, there is more in the names of streets and places than meets the eye. Here, as elsewhere, there is, or there may be, "a paltering with us in a double sense."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KM">
							<span class="label">[KM]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Through rows called "Paradise," by way of showing</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Good Christians that to which they all are going</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_573"><span class="label">[573]</span></a> {434}[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto 1. stanza lxix. line 8, <i>var.</i> ii., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 66, note 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KN"><span class="label">[KN]</span></a>—— <i>distilling into the re-kindling glass</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_574"><span class="label">[574]</span></a> [The streets of London were first regularly lighted with gas in 1812.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_575"><span class="label">[575]</span></a> {435}[Thomas Pennant, in <i>Some Account of London</i>, 1793, p. 444, writes down the Mansion House (1739-1752) as "damned ... to everlasting fame."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_576"><span class="label">[576]</span></a> [Fifty years ago "the lights of Piccadilly" were still regarded as one of the "sights" of London. Byron must often have looked at them from his house in Piccadilly Terrace.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_577"><span class="label">[577]</span></a> [Joseph François Foulon, army commissioner, provoked the penalty of the "lantern" (i.e. an improvised gallows on the yard of a lamp-post at the corner of the Rue de la Vannerie) by his heartless sneer, "Eh bien! si cette canaille n'a pas de pain, elle mangera du foin." He was hanged, July 22, 1789. See <i>The Tale of Two Cities</i>, by Charles Dickens, cap. xxii.; see, too, Carlyle's <i>French Revolution</i>, 1839, i. 253: "With wild yells, Sansculottism clutches him, in its hundred hands: he is whirled ... to the <i>'Lanterne,'</i> ... pleading bitterly for life,—to the deaf winds. Only with the third rope (for two ropes broke, and the quavering voice still pleaded), can he be so much as got hanged! His Body is dragged through the streets; his Head goes aloft on a pike, the mouth filled with grass: amid sounds as of Tophet, from a grass-eating people."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_578"><span class="label">[578]</span></a> {436}"Hells," gaming-houses. What their number may now be in this life, I know not. Before I was of age I knew them pretty accurately, both "gold" and "silver." I was once nearly called out by an acquaintance, because when he asked me where I thought that his soul would be found hereafter, I answered, "In Silver Hell."</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KO">
							<span class="label">[KO]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>At length the boys drew up before a door</i>,</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>From whence poured forth a tribe of well-clad waiters</i>;</p>
							<p>(<i>While on the pavement many a hungry w—re</i></p>
							<p class="i2">
								<i>With which the moralest of cities caters</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>For gentlemen whose passions may boil o'er,</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Stood as the unpacking gathered more spectators,</i>)</p>
							<p>
								<i>And Juan found himself in an extensive</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Apartment;—fashionable but expensive</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KP"><span class="label">[KP]</span></a> {437}<i>'Twas one of the delightfullest hotels</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_579"><span class="label">[579]</span></a> [Perhaps Grillion's Hotel (afterwards Grillion's Club) in Albemarle Street. In 1822 diplomats patronized more than one hotel in and near St. James's Street, but among the "Departures from Grillion's Hotel," recorded in the <i>Morning Chronicle</i> of September, 17, 1822, appositely enough, is that of H.E. Don Juan Garcia, del Rio.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KQ">
							<span class="label">[KQ]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i15">—— <i>of his loves and wars</i>;</p>
							<p>
								<i>And as romantic heads are pretty painters,</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>And ladies like a little spice of Mars</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KR"><span class="label">[KR]</span></a> {438}<i>The false attempt at Truth</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_580"><span class="label">[580]</span></a> {439}[Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i16">"Lo! Erin, thy Lord!</p>
							<p>Kiss his foot with thy blessing"——</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>The Irish Avatar</i>, stanza 14, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 558.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KS">
							<span class="label">[KS]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Kiss hands—or feet—or what Man by and by</i>
							</p>
							<p>Will <i>kiss, not in sad metaphor—but earnest,</i></p>
							<p><i>Unless on Tyrants' sterns—we turn the sternest</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_581"><span class="label">[581]</span></a> {440}"Anent" was a Scotch phrase meaning "concerning"—"with regard to: "it has been made English by the Scotch novels; and, as the Frenchman said, "If it <i>be not, ought to be</i> English." [See, for instance, <i>The Abbot</i>, chap. xvii. 132.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KT">
							<span class="label">[KT]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>But "Damme's" simple—dashing—free and daring</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>The purest blasphemy</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KU">
							<span class="label">[KU]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>About such general matters—but particular</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>A poem's progress should be perpendicular</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_582"><span class="label">[582]</span></a> {441}[<i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 63.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KV"><span class="label">[KV]</span></a> <i>Blushed, too, but it was hidden by their rouge</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KW"><span class="label">[KW]</span></a> <i>The natural and the prepared ceruse</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_583"><span class="label">[583]</span></a> {442}"Drapery Misses."—This term is probably anything now but a <i>mystery</i>. It was, however, almost so to me when I first returned from the East in 1811-1812. It means a pretty, a high-born, a fashionable young female, well instructed by her friends, and furnished by her milliner with a wardrobe upon credit, to be repaid, when married, by the <i>husband</i>. The riddle was first read to me by a young and pretty heiress, on my praising the "drapery" of the <i>"untochered"</i> but "pretty virginities" (like Mrs. Anne Page) of the <i>then</i> day, which has now been some years yesterday: she assured me that the thing was common in London; and as her own thousands, and blooming looks, and rich simplicity of array, put any suspicion in her own case out of the question, I confess I gave some credit to the allegation. If necessary, authorities might be cited; in which case I could quote both "drapery" and the wearers. Let us hope, however, that it is now obsolete.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_584"><span class="label">[584]</span></a> [Compare <i>Hints from Horace</i>, line 173, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 401, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_585"><span class="label">[585]</span></a> {443}[In his so-called "Dedication" of <i>Marino Faliero</i> to Goethe, Byron makes fun of the "nineteen hundred and eighty-seven poets," whose names were to be found in <i>A Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors, etc.</i> (See Introduction to <i>Marino Faliero, Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 340, 341, note 1.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KX"><span class="label">[KX]</span></a> {444}<i>A paper potentate</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_586"><span class="label">[586]</span></a> [See "Introduction to <i>Cain</i>," <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 204.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KY"><span class="label">[KY]</span></a> <i>With turnkey Southey for my Hudson Lowe.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_KZ"><span class="label">[KZ]</span></a> <i>Beneath the reverend Cambyses Croly.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_587"><span class="label">[587]</span></a> [The Reverend George Croly, D.D. (1780-1860), began his literary career as dramatic critic of the <i>Times</i>. "Croly," says H.C. Robinson (<i>Diary</i>, 1869, i. 412), "is a fierce-looking Irishman, very lively in conversation, and certainly has considerable talents as a writer; his eloquence, like his person, is rather energetic than eloquent" (hence the epithet "Cambyses," i.e. "King Cambyses' vein" in <i>var.</i> iii.). "He wrote tragedies, comedies, and novels; and, at last, settled down as a preacher, with the rank of doctor, but of what faculty I do not know" (ibid., footnote, H.C.R., 1847). He wrote, <i>inter alia</i>, <i>Paris in 1815</i>, a poem; <i>Catiline, A Tragedy</i>, 1822; and <i>Salathiel</i>, a novel, 1827. In lines 7, 8, Byron seems to refer to <i>The Angel of the World, An Arabian Poem</i>, published in 1820.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_588"><span class="label">[588]</span></a> [<i>I Henry IV.</i>, act ii. sc. 4, line 197.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_589"><span class="label">[589]</span></a> {445}[Stanza lviii. was first published in 1837. The reference is to Henry Hart Milman (1791-1868). Byron was under the impression that Milman had influenced Murray against continuing the publication of <i>Don Juan</i>. Added to this surmise, was the mistaken belief that it was Milman who had written the article in the <i>Quarterly</i>, which "killed John Keats." Hence the virulence of the attack.</p>
					<p>"Dull Dorus" is obscure, but compare Propertius, <i>Eleg.</i> III. vii. 44, where Callimachus is addressed as "Dore poeta." He is the "ox of verse," because he had been recently appointed to the Professorship of Poetry at Oxford. The "roaring Romans" are "The soldiery" who shout "All, All," in Croly's <i>Catiline</i>, act v. sc. 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LA"><span class="label">[LA]</span></a> <i>Then there's my gentle Barry—who they say.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_590"><span class="label">[590]</span></a> [Jeffrey, in his review of <i>A Sicilian Story, etc.</i>, Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall), 1787-1874 (<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, January, 1820, vol. 33, pp. 144-155), compares <i>Diego de Montilla</i>, a poem in <i>ottava rima</i>, with <i>Don Juan</i>, favourably and unfavourably: "There is no profligacy and no horror ... no mocking of virtue and honour, and no strong mixtures of buffoonery and grandeur." But it may fairly match with Byron and his Italian models "as to the better qualities of elegance, delicacy, and tenderness." See, too, <i>Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine</i>, March, 1820, vol. vi. pp. 153, 647.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_591"><span class="label">[591]</span></a> [See Preface to the <i>Vision of Judgment, Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 484, note 3.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_592"><span class="label">[592]</span></a> [Croker's article in the <i>Quarterly</i> (April, 1818 [pub. September], vol. xix. pp. 204-208) did not "kill John Keats." See letter to George and Georgiana Keats, October, 1818 (<i>Letters, etc.</i>, 1895, p. 215). Byron adopts Shelley's belief that the Reviewer, "miserable man," "one of the meanest," had "wantonly defaced one of the noblest specimens of the workmanship of God." See Preface to <i>Adonais</i>, and stanzas xxxvi., xxxvii.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LB"><span class="label">[LB]</span></a> {446}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i4"><i>And weakly mind, to let that all celestial Particle</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
							<p>or, <i>'T is strange the mind should let such phrases quell its</i></p>
							<p class="i4"><i>Chief Impulse with a few, frail, paper pellets</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_593"><span class="label">[593]</span></a> "Divinæ particulam auræ" [Hor., <i>Sat.</i> ii. 2. 79]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_594"><span class="label">[594]</span></a> [For "the crowd of usurpers" who started up in the reign of Gallienus, and were dignified with the honoured appellation of "the thirty tyrants," see Gibbon's <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, i. 164.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_595"><span class="label">[595]</span></a> [<i>King Lear</i>, act iv. sc. 6, line 15.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_596"><span class="label">[596]</span></a> {447}["Illita Nesseo misi tibi texta veneno."</p>
					<p class="attrib">Ovid., <i>Heroid. Epist</i>. ix. 163.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_597"><span class="label">[597]</span></a> [A "bower," in Moore's phrase, signifies a solitude <i>à deux</i>; e.g. "Here's the Bower she lov'd so much."</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Come to me, love, the twilight star</p>
							<p>Shall guide thee to my bower."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Moore.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_598"><span class="label">[598]</span></a> {448}[Compare <i>The Waltz</i>, lines 220-229, <i>et passim</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 501.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_599"><span class="label">[599]</span></a> {449}Scotch for goblin.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LC"><span class="label">[LC]</span></a> <i>Handsome but</i> blasé——— [MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_600"><span class="label">[600]</span></a> {450}[The sentiment is reiterated in <i>The Night Thoughts</i>, and is the theme of <i>Resignation</i>, which was written and published when Young was more than eighty years old. ]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LD"><span class="label">[LD]</span></a> <i>And fresher, since without a breath of air</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LE"><span class="label">[LE]</span></a> <i>Where are the thousand lovely innocents?</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_601"><span class="label">[601]</span></a> ["I have ... written ... to express my willingness to accept the, or almost any mortgage, any thing to get out of the tremulous Funds of these oscillating times. There will be a war somewhere, no doubt—and whatever it may be, the Funds will be affected more or less; so pray get us out of them with all proper expedition. It has been the burthen of my song to you three years and better, and about as useful as better counsels."—Letter of Byron to Kinnaird, January 18, 1823, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 162, 163.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_602"><span class="label">[602]</span></a> {451}[For William Pole Tylney Long Wellesley (1788-1857), see <i>The Waltz</i>, line 21, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 484, note 1. He was only on the way to being "diddled" in 1822, but the prophecy (suggested, no doubt, by the announcement of the sale of furniture, etc., at Wanstead House, in the <i>Morning Chronicle</i>, July 8, 1822) was ultimately fulfilled. Samuel Whitbread, born 1758, committed suicide July 6, 1815. Sir Samuel Romilly, born 1758, committed suicide November 2, 1818.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_603"><span class="label">[603]</span></a> [According to Charles Greville, George the Third made two wills—the first in 1770, the second, which he never signed, in 1810. By the first will he left "all he had to the Queen for her life, Buckingham House to the Duke of Clarence," etc., and as Buckingham House had been twice sold, and the other legatees were dead, a question arose between the King and the Duke of York as to the right of inheritance of their father's personal property. George IV. conceived that it devolved upon him personally, and not on the Crown, and "consequently appropriated to himself the whole of the money and the jewels." It is possible that this difference between the brothers was noised abroad, and that old stories of the destruction of royal wills were revived to the new king's discredit. (See <i>The Greville Memoirs</i>, 1875, i. 64, 65.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_604"><span class="label">[604]</span></a> [See Moore's <i>Fum and Hum, the Two Birds of Royalty</i>, appended to his <i>Fudge Family</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_605"><span class="label">[605]</span></a> [Lady Caroline Lamb and Lady Frances Wedderburn Webster.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LF"><span class="label">[LF]</span></a> {452}—— <i>their caps and curls at Dukes.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_606"><span class="label">[606]</span></a> {453}[The Congress at Verona, in 1822. See the Introduction to <i>The Age of Bronze, Poetical Works</i>, 1891, v. 537-540.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_607"><span class="label">[607]</span></a> [<i>2 Henry IV.</i>, act iv. sc. 3, line 117.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_608"><span class="label">[608]</span></a> [Hor., <i>Od.</i> I. xi. line 8.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_609"><span class="label">[609]</span></a> [<i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 5, line 24.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_610"><span class="label">[610]</span></a> [<i>1 Henry IV.</i>, act ii. sc. 4, line 463.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_611"><span class="label">[611]</span></a> [See the <i>Secret Memoirs and Manners of several Persons of Quality, of Both Sexes, from the New Atalantis</i>, 1709, a work in which the authoress, Mrs. Manley, satirizes the distinguished characters of her day. Warburton (<i>Works of Pope</i>, ed. 1751, i. 244) calls it "a famous book.... full of court and party scandal, and in a loose effeminacy of style and sentiment, which well suited the debauched taste of the better vulgar." Pope also alludes to it in the <i>Rape of the Lock</i>, iii. 165, 166—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"As long as <i>Atalantis</i> shall be read,</p>
							<p>Or the small pillow grace a lady's bed."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>And Swift, in his ballad on "Corinna" (stanza 8)—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Her common-place book all gallant is,</p>
							<p class="i2">Of scandal now a cornucopia,</p>
							<p>She pours it out in <i>Atalantis</i>,</p>
							<p class="i2">Or memoirs of the New Utopia."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Works</i>, 1824, xii. 302.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_612"><span class="label">[612]</span></a> {454}[Oct. 17, 1822.—MS.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
