<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto XIII<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_653">[653]</a></h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I now mean to be serious;—it is time,</p>
					<p class="i2">Since Laughter now-a-days is deemed too serious;</p>
					<p>A jest at Vice by Virtue's called a crime,</p>
					<p class="i2">And critically held as deleterious:</p>
					<p>Besides, the sad's a source of the sublime,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although, when long, a little apt to weary us;</p>
					<p>And therefore shall my lay soar high and solemn,</p>
					<p>As an old temple dwindled to a column.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Lady Adeline Amundeville</p>
					<p class="i2">('T is an old Norman name, and to be found</p>
					<p>In pedigrees, by those who wander still</p>
					<p class="i2">Along the last fields of that Gothic ground)</p>
					<p>Was high-born, wealthy by her father's will,</p>
					<p class="i2">And beauteous, even where beauties most abound,</p>
					<p>In Britain—which, of course, true patriots find</p>
					<p>The goodliest soil of Body and of Mind.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I'll not gainsay them; it is not my cue;</p>
					<p class="i2">I'll leave them to their taste, no doubt the best;</p>
					<p>An eye's an eye, and whether black or blue,</p>
					<p class="i2">Is no great matter, so 't is in request;</p>
					<p>'T is nonsense to dispute about a hue—</p>
					<p class="i2">The kindest may be taken as a test.</p>
					<p>The fair sex should be always fair; and no man,</p>
					<p>Till thirty, should perceive there's a plain woman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And after that serene and somewhat dull</p>
					<p class="i2">Epoch, that awkward corner turned for days</p>
					<p>More quiet, when our moon's no more at full,</p>
					<p class="i2">We may presume to criticise or praise;</p>
					<p>Because Indifference begins to lull</p>
					<p class="i2">Our passions, and we walk in Wisdom's ways;</p>
					<p>Also because the figure and the face</p>
					<p>Hint, that 't is time to give the younger place.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I know that some would fain postpone this era,</p>
					<p class="i2">Reluctant as all placemen to resign</p>
					<p>Their post; but theirs is merely a chimera,</p>
					<p class="i2">For they have passed Life's equinoctial line:</p>
					<p>But then they have their claret and Madeira,</p>
					<p class="i2">To irrigate the dryness of decline;</p>
					<p>And County meetings, and the Parliament,</p>
					<p>And debt—and what not, for their solace sent.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And is there not Religion, and Reform,</p>
					<p class="i2">Peace, War, the taxes, and what's called the "Nation"?</p>
					<p>The struggle to be pilots in a storm?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_654">[654]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The landed and the monied speculation?</p>
					<p>The joys of mutual hate to keep them warm,</p>
					<p class="i2">Instead of Love, that mere hallucination?</p>
					<p>Now Hatred is by far the longest pleasure;</p>
					<p>Men love in haste, but they detest at leisure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Rough Johnson, the great moralist, professed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Right honestly, "he liked an honest hater!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_655">[655]</a>—</p>
					<p>The only truth that yet has been confessed</p>
					<p class="i2">Within these latest thousand years or later.</p>
					<p>Perhaps the fine old fellow spoke in jest:—</p>
					<p class="i2">For my part, I am but a mere spectator,</p>
					<p>And gaze where'er the palace or the hovel is,</p>
					<p>Much in the mode of Goethe's Mephistopheles;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But neither love nor hate in much excess;</p>
					<p class="i2">Though 't was not once so. If I sneer sometimes,</p>
					<p>It is because I cannot well do less,</p>
					<p class="i2">And now and then it also suits my rhymes.</p>
					<p>I should be very willing to redress</p>
					<p class="i2">Men's wrongs, and rather check than punish crimes,</p>
					<p>Had not Cervantes, in that too true tale</p>
					<p>Of Quixote, shown how all such efforts fail.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_656">[656]</a></h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of all tales 't is the saddest—and more sad,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because it makes us smile: his hero's right,</p>
					<p>And still pursues the right;—to curb the bad</p>
					<p class="i2">His only object, and 'gainst odds to fight</p>
					<p>His guerdon: 't is his virtue makes him mad!</p>
					<p class="i2">But his adventures form a sorry sight;—</p>
					<p>A sorrier still is the great moral taught</p>
					<p>By that real Epic unto all who have thought.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LX">[LX]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Redressing injury, revenging wrong,</p>
					<p class="i2">To aid the damsel and destroy the caitiff;</p>
					<p>Opposing singly the united strong,</p>
					<p class="i2">From foreign yoke to free the helpless native:—</p>
					<p>Alas! must noblest views, like an old song,</p>
					<p class="i2">Be for mere Fancy's sport a theme creative,</p>
					<p>A jest, a riddle, Fame through thin and thick sought!</p>
					<p>And Socrates himself but Wisdom's Quixote?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Cervantes smiled Spain's chivalry away;</p>
					<p class="i2">A single laugh demolished the right arm</p>
					<p>Of his own country;—seldom since that day</p>
					<p class="i2">Has Spain had heroes. While Romance could charm,</p>
					<p>The World gave ground before her bright array;</p>
					<p class="i2">And therefore have his volumes done such harm,</p>
					<p>That all their glory, as a composition,</p>
					<p>Was dearly purchased by his land's perdition.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I'm "at my old lunes"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_657">[657]</a>—digression, and forget</p>
					<p class="i2">The Lady Adeline Amundeville;</p>
					<p>The fair most fatal Juan ever met,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although she was not evil nor meant ill;</p>
					<p>But Destiny and Passion spread the net</p>
					<p class="i2">(Fate is a good excuse for our own will),</p>
					<p>And caught them;—what do they <i>not</i> catch, methinks?</p>
					<p>But I'm not Oedipus, and Life's a Sphinx.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I tell the tale as it is told, nor dare</p>
					<p class="i2">To venture a solution: "<i>Davus sum!</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_658">[658]</a></p>
					<p>And now I will proceed upon the pair.</p>
					<p class="i2">Sweet Adeline, amidst the gay World's hum,</p>
					<p>Was the Queen-Bee, the glass of all that's fair;</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose charms made all men speak, and women dumb.</p>
					<p>The last's a miracle, and such was reckoned,</p>
					<p>And since that time there has not been a second.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Chaste was she, to Detraction's desperation,</p>
					<p class="i2">And wedded unto one she had loved well—</p>
					<p>A man known in the councils of the Nation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Cool, and quite English, imperturbable,</p>
					<p>Though apt to act with fire upon occasion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Proud of himself and her: the World could tell</p>
					<p>Nought against either, and both seemed secure—</p>
					<p>She in her virtue, he in his hauteur.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It chanced some diplomatical relations,</p>
					<p class="i2">Arising out of business, often brought</p>
					<p>Himself and Juan in their mutual stations</p>
					<p class="i2">Into close contact. Though reserved, nor caught</p>
					<p>By specious seeming, Juan's youth, and patience,</p>
					<p class="i2">And talent, on his haughty spirit wrought,</p>
					<p>And formed a basis of esteem, which ends</p>
					<p>In making men what Courtesy calls friends.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And thus Lord Henry, who was cautious as</p>
					<p class="i2">Reserve and Pride could make him, and full slow</p>
					<p>In judging men—when once his judgment was</p>
					<p class="i2">Determined, right or wrong, on friend or foe,</p>
					<p>Had all the pertinacity Pride has,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which knows no ebb to its imperious flow,</p>
					<p>And loves or hates, disdaining to be guided,</p>
					<p>Because its own good pleasure hath decided.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His friendships, therefore, and no less aversions,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though oft well founded, which confirmed but more</p>
					<p>His prepossessions, like the laws of Persians</p>
					<p class="i2">And Medes, would ne'er revoke what went before.</p>
					<p>His feelings had not those strange fits, like tertians,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of common likings, which make some deplore</p>
					<p>What they should laugh at—the mere ague still</p>
					<p>Of men's regard, the fever or the chill.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"'T is not in mortals to command success:"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_659">[659]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But <i>do you more</i>, Sempronius—<i>don't</i> deserve it,</p>
					<p>And take my word, you won't have any less.</p>
					<p class="i2">Be wary, watch the time, and always serve it;</p>
					<p>Give gently way, when there's too great a press;</p>
					<p class="i2">And for your conscience, only learn to nerve it;</p>
					<p>For, like a racer, or a boxer training,</p>
					<p>'T will make, if proved, vast efforts without paining.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lord Henry also liked to be superior,</p>
					<p class="i2">As most men do, the little or the great;</p>
					<p>The very lowest find out an inferior,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least they think so, to exert their state</p>
					<p>Upon: for there are very few things wearier</p>
					<p class="i2">Than solitary Pride's oppressive weight,</p>
					<p>Which mortals generously would divide,</p>
					<p>By bidding others carry while they ride.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In birth, in rank, in fortune likewise equal,</p>
					<p class="i2">O'er Juan he could no distinction claim;</p>
					<p>In years he had the advantage of Time's sequel;</p>
					<p class="i2">And, as he thought, in country much the same—</p>
					<p>Because bold Britons have a tongue and free quill,</p>
					<p class="i2">At which all modern nations vainly aim;</p>
					<p>And the Lord Henry was a great debater,</p>
					<p>So that few Members kept the House up later.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>These were advantages: and then he thought—</p>
					<p class="i2">It was his foible, but by no means sinister—</p>
					<p>That few or none more than himself had caught</p>
					<p class="i2">Court mysteries, having been himself a minister:</p>
					<p>He liked to teach that which he had been taught,</p>
					<p class="i2">And greatly shone whenever there had been a stir;</p>
					<p>And reconciled all qualities which grace man,</p>
					<p>Always a patriot—and, sometimes, a placeman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He liked the gentle Spaniard for his gravity;</p>
					<p class="i2">He almost honoured him for his docility;</p>
					<p>Because, though young, he acquiesced with suavity,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or contradicted but with proud humility.</p>
					<p>He knew the World, and would not see depravity</p>
					<p class="i2">In faults which sometimes show the soil's fertility,</p>
					<p>If that the weeds o'erlive not the first crop—</p>
					<p>For then they are very difficult to stop.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then he talked with him about Madrid,</p>
					<p class="i2">Constantinople, and such distant places;</p>
					<p>Where people always did as they were bid,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or did what they should not with foreign graces.</p>
					<p>Of coursers also spake they: Henry rid</p>
					<p class="i2">Well, like most Englishmen, and loved the races;</p>
					<p>And Juan, like a true-born Andalusian,</p>
					<p>Could back<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_660">[660]</a> a horse, as Despots ride a Russian.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And thus acquaintance grew, at noble routs,</p>
					<p class="i2">And diplomatic dinners, or at other—</p>
					<p>For Juan stood well both with Ins and Outs,</p>
					<p class="i2">As in freemasonry a higher brother.</p>
					<p>Upon his talent Henry had no doubts;</p>
					<p class="i2">His manner showed him sprung from a high mother,</p>
					<p>And all men like to show their hospitality</p>
					<p>To him whose breeding matches with his quality.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At Blank-Blank Square;—for we will break no squares<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_661">[661]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">By naming streets: since men are so censorious,</p>
					<p>And apt to sow an author's wheat with tares,</p>
					<p class="i2">Reaping allusions private and inglorious,</p>
					<p>Where none were dreamt of, unto Love's affairs,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which were, or are, or are to be notorious,</p>
					<p>That therefore do I previously declare,</p>
					<p>Lord Henry's mansion was in Blank-Blank Square.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Also there bin<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_662">[662]</a> another pious reason</p>
					<p class="i2">For making squares and streets anonymous;</p>
					<p>Which is, that there is scarce a single season</p>
					<p class="i2">Which doth not shake some very splendid house</p>
					<p>With some slight heart-quake of domestic treason—</p>
					<p class="i2">A topic Scandal doth delight to rouse:</p>
					<p>Such I might stumble over unawares,</p>
					<p>Unless I knew the very chastest squares.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is true, I might have chosen Piccadilly,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_663">[663]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A place where peccadillos are unknown;</p>
					<p>But I have motives, whether wise or silly,</p>
					<p class="i2">For letting that pure sanctuary alone.</p>
					<p>Therefore I name not square, street, place, until I</p>
					<p class="i2">Find one where nothing naughty can be shown,</p>
					<p>A vestal shrine of Innocence of Heart:</p>
					<p>Such are—but I have lost the London Chart.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At Henry's mansion then, in Blank-Blank Square,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was Juan a <i>recherché</i>, welcome guest,</p>
					<p>As many other noble scions were;</p>
					<p class="i2">And some who had but Talent for their crest;</p>
					<p>Or Wealth, which is a passport everywhere;</p>
					<p class="i2">Or even mere Fashion, which indeed's the best</p>
					<p>Recommendation; and to be well dressed</p>
					<p>Will very often supersede the rest.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And since "there's safety in a multitude</p>
					<p class="i2">Of counsellors," as Solomon has said,</p>
					<p>Or some one for him, in some sage, grave mood;—</p>
					<p class="i2">Indeed we see the daily proof displayed</p>
					<p>In Senates, at the Bar, in wordy feud,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where'er collective wisdom can parade,</p>
					<p>Which is the only cause that we can guess</p>
					<p>Of Britain's present wealth and happiness;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But as "there's safety" grafted in the number</p>
					<p class="i2">"Of counsellors," for men,—thus for the sex</p>
					<p>A large acquaintance lets not Virtue slumber;</p>
					<p class="i2">Or should it shake, the choice will more perplex—</p>
					<p>Variety itself will more encumber.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LY">[LY]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">'Midst many rocks we guard more against wrecks—</p>
					<p>And thus with women: howsoe'er it shocks some's</p>
					<p>Self-love, there's safety in a crowd of coxcombs.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Adeline had not the least occasion</p>
					<p class="i2">For such a shield, which leaves but little merit</p>
					<p>To Virtue proper, or good education.</p>
					<p class="i2">Her chief resource was in her own high spirit,</p>
					<p>Which judged Mankind at their due estimation;</p>
					<p class="i2">And for coquetry, she disdained to wear it—</p>
					<p>Secure of admiration: its impression</p>
					<p>Was faint—as of an every-day possession.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>To all she was polite without parade;</p>
					<p class="i2">To some she showed attention of that kind</p>
					<p>Which flatters, but is flattery conveyed</p>
					<p class="i2">In such a sort as cannot leave behind</p>
					<p>A trace unworthy either wife or maid;—</p>
					<p class="i2">A gentle, genial courtesy of mind,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_LZ">[LZ]</a></p>
					<p>To those who were, or passed for meritorious,</p>
					<p>Just to console sad Glory for being glorious;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Which is in all respects, save now and then,</p>
					<p class="i2">A dull and desolate appendage. Gaze</p>
					<p>Upon the shades of those distinguished men</p>
					<p class="i2">Who were or are the puppet-shows of praise,</p>
					<p>The praise of persecution. Gaze again</p>
					<p class="i2">On the most favoured; and amidst the blaze</p>
					<p>Of sunset halos o'er the laurel-browed,</p>
					<p>What can ye recognise?—a gilded cloud.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There also was of course in Adeline</p>
					<p class="i2">That calm patrician polish in the address,</p>
					<p>Which ne'er can pass the equinoctial line</p>
					<p class="i2">Of anything which Nature would express;</p>
					<p>Just as a Mandarin finds nothing fine,—</p>
					<p class="i2">At least his manner suffers not to guess,</p>
					<p>That anything he views can greatly please:</p>
					<p>Perhaps we have borrowed this from the Chinese—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MA">[MA]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Perhaps from Horace: his <i>"Nil admirari"</i></p>
					<p class="i2">Was what he called the "Art of Happiness"—</p>
					<p>An art on which the artists greatly vary,</p>
					<p class="i2">And have not yet attained to much success.</p>
					<p>However, 't is expedient to be wary:</p>
					<p class="i2">Indifference, certes, don't produce distress;</p>
					<p>And rash Enthusiasm in good society</p>
					<p>Were nothing but a moral inebriety.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Adeline was not indifferent: for</p>
					<p class="i2">(<i>Now</i> for a common-place!) beneath the snow,</p>
					<p>As a Volcano holds the lava more</p>
					<p class="i2">Within—<i>et cætera</i>. Shall I go on?—No!</p>
					<p>I hate to hunt down a tired metaphor,</p>
					<p class="i2">So let the often-used Volcano go.</p>
					<p>Poor thing! How frequently, by me and others,</p>
					<p>It hath been stirred up till its smoke quite smothers!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I'll have another figure in a trice:—</p>
					<p class="i2">What say you to a bottle of champagne?</p>
					<p>Frozen into a very vinous ice,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which leaves few drops of that immortal rain,</p>
					<p>Yet in the very centre, past all price,</p>
					<p class="i2">About a liquid glassful will remain;</p>
					<p>And this is stronger than the strongest grape</p>
					<p>Could e'er express in its expanded shape:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is the whole spirit brought to a quintessence;</p>
					<p class="i2">And thus the chilliest aspects may concentre</p>
					<p>A hidden nectar under a cold presence.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MB">[MB]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And such are many—though I only meant her</p>
					<p>From whom I now deduce these moral lessons,</p>
					<p class="i2">On which the Muse has always sought to enter.</p>
					<p>And your cold people are beyond all price,</p>
					<p>When once you've broken their confounded ice.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But after all they are a North-West Passage</p>
					<p class="i2">Unto the glowing India of the soul;</p>
					<p>And as the good ships sent upon that message</p>
					<p class="i2">Have not exactly ascertained the Pole</p>
					<p>(Though Parry's efforts look a lucky presage),<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MC">[MC]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Thus gentlemen may run upon a shoal;</p>
					<p>For if the Pole's not open, but all frost</p>
					<p>(A chance still), 't is a voyage or vessel lost.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And young beginners may as well commence</p>
					<p class="i2">With quiet cruising o'er the ocean, Woman;</p>
					<p>While those who are not beginners should have sense</p>
					<p class="i2">Enough to make for port, ere Time shall summon</p>
					<p>With his grey signal-flag; and the past tense,</p>
					<p class="i2">The dreary <i>Fuimus</i> of all things human,</p>
					<p>Must be declined, while Life's thin thread's spun out</p>
					<p>Between the gaping heir and gnawing gout.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Heaven must be diverted; its diversion</p>
					<p class="i2">Is sometimes truculent—but never mind:</p>
					<p>The World upon the whole is worth the assertion</p>
					<p class="i2">(If but for comfort) that all things are kind:</p>
					<p>And that same devilish doctrine of the Persian,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_664">[664]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Of the "Two Principles," but leaves behind</p>
					<p>As many doubts as any other doctrine</p>
					<p>Has ever puzzled Faith withal, or yoked her in.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The English winter—ending in July,</p>
					<p class="i2">To recommence in August—now was done.</p>
					<p>'T is the postilion's paradise: wheels fly;</p>
					<p class="i2">On roads, East, South, North, West, there is a run.</p>
					<p>But for post-horses who finds sympathy?</p>
					<p class="i2">Man's pity's for himself, or for his son,</p>
					<p>Always premising that said son at college</p>
					<p>Has not contracted much more debt than knowledge.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The London winter's ended in July—</p>
					<p class="i2">Sometimes a little later. I don't err</p>
					<p>In this: whatever other blunders lie</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon my shoulders, here I must aver</p>
					<p>My Muse a glass of <i>Weatherology</i>;</p>
					<p class="i2">For Parliament is our barometer:</p>
					<p>Let Radicals its other acts attack,</p>
					<p>Its sessions form our only almanack.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When its quicksilver's down at zero,—lo!</p>
					<p class="i2">Coach, chariot, luggage, baggage, equipage!</p>
					<p>Wheels whirl from Carlton Palace to Soho,</p>
					<p class="i2">And happiest they who horses can engage;</p>
					<p>The turnpikes glow with dust; and Rotten Row</p>
					<p class="i2">Sleeps from the chivalry of this bright age;</p>
					<p>And tradesmen, with long bills and longer faces,</p>
					<p>Sigh—as the postboys fasten on the traces.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They and their bills, "Arcadians both,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_665">[665]</a> are left</p>
					<p class="i2">To the Greek Kalends of another session.</p>
					<p>Alas! to them of ready cash bereft,</p>
					<p class="i2">What hope remains? Of <i>hope</i> the full possession,</p>
					<p>Or generous draft, conceded as a gift,</p>
					<p class="i2">At a long date—till they can get a fresh one—</p>
					<p>Hawked about at a discount, small or large;</p>
					<p>Also the solace of an overcharge.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But these are trifles. Downward flies my Lord,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nodding beside my Lady in his carriage.</p>
					<p>Away! away! "Fresh horses!" are the word,</p>
					<p class="i2">And changed as quickly as hearts after marriage;</p>
					<p>The obsequious landlord hath the change restored;</p>
					<p class="i2">The postboys have no reason to disparage</p>
					<p>Their fee; but ere the watered wheels may hiss hence,</p>
					<p>The ostler pleads too for a reminiscence.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is granted; and the valet mounts the dickey—</p>
					<p class="i2">That gentleman of Lords and Gentlemen;</p>
					<p>Also my Lady's gentlewoman, tricky,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tricked out, but modest more than poet's pen</p>
					<p>Can paint,—<i>"Cosi viaggino i Ricchi!"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_666">[666]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">(Excuse a foreign slipslop now and then,</p>
					<p>If but to show I've travelled: and what's Travel,</p>
					<p>Unless it teaches one to quote and cavil?)</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The London winter and the country summer</p>
					<p class="i2">Were well nigh over. 'T is perhaps a pity,</p>
					<p>When Nature wears the gown that doth become her,</p>
					<p class="i2">To lose those best months in a sweaty city,</p>
					<p>And wait until the nightingale grows dumber,</p>
					<p class="i2">Listening debates not very wise or witty,</p>
					<p>Ere patriots their true <i>country</i> can remember;—</p>
					<p>But there's no shooting (save grouse) till September.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I've done with my tirade. The World was gone;</p>
					<p class="i2">The twice two thousand, for whom Earth was made,</p>
					<p>Were vanished to be what they call alone—</p>
					<p class="i2">That is, with thirty servants for parade,</p>
					<p>As many guests, or more; before whom groan</p>
					<p class="i2">As many covers, duly, daily laid.</p>
					<p>Let none accuse old England's hospitality—</p>
					<p>Its quantity is but condensed to quality.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lord Henry and the Lady Adeline</p>
					<p class="i2">Departed like the rest of their compeers,</p>
					<p>The peerage, to a mansion very fine;</p>
					<p class="i2">The Gothic Babel of a thousand years.</p>
					<p>None than themselves could boast a longer line,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where Time through heroes and through beauties steers;</p>
					<p>And oaks as olden as their pedigree</p>
					<p>Told of their Sires—a tomb in every tree.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A paragraph in every paper told</p>
					<p class="i2">Of their departure—such is modern fame:</p>
					<p>'T is pity that it takes no further hold</p>
					<p class="i2">Than an advertisement, or much the same;</p>
					<p>When, ere the ink be dry, the sound grows cold.</p>
					<p class="i2">The Morning Post was foremost to proclaim—</p>
					<p>"Departure, for his country seat, to-day,</p>
					<p>Lord H. Amundeville and Lady A.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"We understand the splendid host intends<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MD">[MD]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">To entertain, this autumn, a select</p>
					<p>And numerous party of his noble friends;</p>
					<p class="i2">'Midst whom we have heard, from sources quite correct,</p>
					<p>The Duke of D—— the shooting season spends,</p>
					<p class="i2">With many more by rank and fashion decked;</p>
					<p>Also a foreigner of high condition,</p>
					<p>The envoy of the secret Russian mission."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And thus we see—who doubts the Morning Post?</p>
					<p class="i2">(Whose articles are like the "Thirty-nine,"</p>
					<p>Which those most swear to who believe them most)—</p>
					<p class="i2">Our gay Russ Spaniard was ordained to shine,</p>
					<p>Decked by the rays reflected from his host,</p>
					<p class="i2">With those who, Pope says, "greatly daring dine."—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_667">[667]</a></p>
					<p>'T is odd, but true,—last war the News abounded</p>
					<p>More with these dinners than the killed or wounded;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>As thus: "On Thursday there was a grand dinner;</p>
					<p class="i2">Present, Lords A.B.C."—- Earls, dukes, by name</p>
					<p>Announced with no less pomp than Victory's winner:</p>
					<p class="i2">Then underneath, and in the very same</p>
					<p>Column: date, "Falmouth. There has lately been here</p>
					<p class="i2">The Slap-dash regiment, so well known to Fame,</p>
					<p>Whose loss in the late action we regret:</p>
					<p>The vacancies are filled up—see Gazette."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>To Norman Abbey<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_668">[668]</a> whirled the noble pair,—</p>
					<p class="i2">An old, old Monastery once, and now</p>
					<p>Still older mansion—of a rich and rare</p>
					<p class="i2">Mixed Gothic, such as artists all allow</p>
					<p>Few specimens yet left us can compare</p>
					<p class="i2">Withal: it lies, perhaps, a little low,</p>
					<p>Because the monks preferred a hill behind,</p>
					<p>To shelter their devotion from the wind.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It stood embosomed in a happy valley,</p>
					<p class="i2">Crowned by high woodlands, where the Druid oak<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_669">[669]</a></p>
					<p>Stood like Caractacus, in act to rally</p>
					<p class="i2">His host, with broad arms 'gainst the thunder-stroke;</p>
					<p>And from beneath his boughs were seen to sally</p>
					<p class="i2">The dappled foresters; as Day awoke,</p>
					<p>The branching stag swept down with all his herd,</p>
					<p>To quaff a brook which murmured like a bird.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Before the mansion lay a lucid Lake,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_670">[670]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Broad as transparent, deep, and freshly fed</p>
					<p>By a river, which its softened way did take</p>
					<p class="i2">In currents through the calmer water spread</p>
					<p>Around: the wildfowl nestled in the brake</p>
					<p class="i2">And sedges, brooding in their liquid bed:</p>
					<p>The woods<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_671">[671]</a> sloped downwards to its brink, and stood</p>
					<p>With their green faces fixed upon the flood.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Its outlet dashed into a deep cascade,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sparkling with foam, until again subsiding,</p>
					<p>Its shriller echoes—like an infant made<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_ME">[ME]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Quiet—sank into softer ripples, gliding</p>
					<p>Into a rivulet; and thus allayed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Pursued its course, now gleaming, and now hiding</p>
					<p>Its windings through the woods; now clear, now blue,</p>
					<p>According as the skies their shadows threw.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A glorious remnant of the Gothic pile</p>
					<p class="i2">(While yet the Church was Rome's) stood half apart</p>
					<p>In a grand Arch, which once screened many an aisle.</p>
					<p class="i2">These last had disappeared—a loss to Art:</p>
					<p>The first yet frowned superbly o'er the soil,</p>
					<p class="i2">And kindled feelings in the roughest heart,</p>
					<p>Which mourned the power of Time's or Tempest's march,</p>
					<p>In gazing on that venerable Arch.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MF">[MF]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Within a niche, nigh to its pinnacle,</p>
					<p class="i2">Twelve Saints had once stood sanctified in stone;</p>
					<p>But these had fallen, not when the friars fell,</p>
					<p class="i2">But in the war which struck Charles from his throne,</p>
					<p>When each house was a fortalice—as tell</p>
					<p class="i2">The annals of full many a line undone,—</p>
					<p>The gallant Cavaliers,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_672">[672]</a> who fought in vain</p>
					<p>For those who knew not to resign or reign.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But in a higher niche, alone, but crowned,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Virgin-Mother of the God-born Child,</p>
					<p>With her Son in her blesséd arms, looked round,</p>
					<p class="i2">Spared by some chance when all beside was spoiled:</p>
					<p>She made the earth below seem holy ground.</p>
					<p class="i2">This may be superstition, weak or wild;</p>
					<p>But even the faintest relics of a shrine</p>
					<p>Of any worship wake some thoughts divine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A mighty window, hollow in the centre,</p>
					<p class="i2">Shorn of its glass of thousand colourings,</p>
					<p>Through which the deepened glories once could enter,</p>
					<p class="i2">Streaming from off the Sun like Seraph's wings,</p>
					<p>Now yawns all desolate: now loud, now fainter,</p>
					<p class="i2">The gale sweeps through its fretwork, and oft sings</p>
					<p>The owl his anthem, where the silenced quire</p>
					<p>Lie with their Hallelujahs quenched like fire.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But in the noontide of the moon, and when<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MG">[MG]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The wind is wingéd from one point of heaven,</p>
					<p>There moans a strange unearthly sound, which then</p>
					<p class="i2">Is musical—a dying accent driven</p>
					<p>Through the huge Arch, which soars and sinks again.</p>
					<p class="i2">Some deem it but the distant echo given</p>
					<p>Back to the night wind by the waterfall,</p>
					<p>And harmonised by the old choral wall:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Others, that some original shape, or form</p>
					<p class="i2">Shaped by decay perchance, hath given the power</p>
					<p>(Though less than that of Memnon's statue,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_673">[673]</a> warm</p>
					<p class="i2">In Egypt's rays, to harp at a fixed hour)</p>
					<p>To this grey ruin: with a voice to charm,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sad, but serene, it sweeps o'er tree or tower;</p>
					<p>The cause I know not, nor can solve; but such</p>
					<p>The fact:—I've heard it,—once perhaps too much.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_674">[674]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Amidst the court a Gothic fountain played,</p>
					<p class="i2">Symmetrical, but decked with carvings quaint—</p>
					<p>Strange faces, like to men in masquerade,</p>
					<p class="i2">And here perhaps a monster, there a saint:</p>
					<p>The spring gushed through grim mouths of granite made,</p>
					<p class="i2">And sparkled into basins, where it spent</p>
					<p>Its little torrent in a thousand bubbles,</p>
					<p>Like man's vain Glory, and his vainer troubles.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Mansion's self was vast and venerable,</p>
					<p class="i2">With more of the monastic than has been</p>
					<p>Elsewhere preserved: the cloisters still were stable,</p>
					<p class="i2">The cells, too, and Refectory, I ween:</p>
					<p>An exquisite small chapel had been able,</p>
					<p class="i2">Still unimpaired, to decorate the scene;</p>
					<p>The rest had been reformed, replaced, or sunk,</p>
					<p>And spoke more of the baron than the monk.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Huge halls, long galleries, spacious chambers, joined</p>
					<p class="i2">By no quite lawful marriage of the arts,</p>
					<p>Might shock a connoisseur; but when combined,</p>
					<p class="i2">Formed a whole which, irregular in parts,</p>
					<p>Yet left a grand impression on the mind,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least of those whose eyes are in their hearts:</p>
					<p>We gaze upon a giant for his stature,</p>
					<p>Nor judge at first if all be true to nature.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Steel Barons, molten the next generation</p>
					<p class="i2">To silken rows of gay and gartered Earls,</p>
					<p>Glanced from the walls in goodly preservation:</p>
					<p class="i2">And Lady Marys blooming into girls,</p>
					<p>With fair long locks, had also kept their station:</p>
					<p class="i2">And Countesses mature in robes and pearls:</p>
					<p>Also some beauties of Sir Peter Lely,</p>
					<p>Whose drapery hints we may admire them freely.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Judges in very formidable ermine</p>
					<p class="i2">Were there, with brows that did not much invite</p>
					<p>The accused to think their lordships would determine</p>
					<p class="i2">His cause by leaning much from might to right:</p>
					<p>Bishops, who had not left a single sermon;</p>
					<p class="i2">Attorneys-general, awful to the sight,</p>
					<p>As hinting more (unless our judgments warp us)</p>
					<p>Of the "Star Chamber" than of "Habeas Corpus."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Generals, some all in armour, of the old</p>
					<p class="i2">And iron time, ere lead had ta'en the lead;</p>
					<p>Others in wigs of Marlborough's martial fold,</p>
					<p class="i2">Huger than twelve of our degenerate breed:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MH">[MH]</a></p>
					<p>Lordlings, with staves of white or keys of gold:</p>
					<p class="i2">Nimrods, whose canvas scarce contained the steed;</p>
					<p>And, here and there, some stern high patriot stood,</p>
					<p>Who could not get the place for which he sued.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But ever and anon, to soothe your vision,</p>
					<p class="i2">Fatigued with these hereditary glories,</p>
					<p>There rose a Carlo Dolce or a Titian,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or wilder group of savage Salvatore's:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_675">[675]</a></p>
					<p>Here danced Albano's boys, and here the sea shone</p>
					<p class="i2">In Vernet's ocean lights; and there the stories</p>
					<p>Of martyrs awed, as Spagnoletto tainted</p>
					<p>His brush with all the blood of all the sainted.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here sweetly spread a landscape of Lorraine;</p>
					<p class="i2">There Rembrandt made his darkness equal light,</p>
					<p>Or gloomy Caravaggio's gloomier stain</p>
					<p class="i2">Bronzed o'er some lean and stoic anchorite:—</p>
					<p>But, lo! a Teniers woos, and not in vain,</p>
					<p class="i2">Your eyes to revel in a livelier sight:</p>
					<p>His bell-mouthed goblet makes me feel quite Danish<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_676">[676]</a></p>
					<p>Or Dutch with thirst—What, ho! a flask of Rhenish.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MI">[MI]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, reader! if that thou canst read,—and know,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is not enough to spell, or even to read,</p>
					<p>To constitute a reader—there must go</p>
					<p class="i2">Virtues of which both you and I have need;—</p>
					<p>Firstly, begin with the beginning—(though</p>
					<p class="i2">That clause is hard); and secondly, proceed:</p>
					<p>Thirdly, commence not with the end—or, sinning</p>
					<p>In this sort, end at last with the beginning.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But, reader, thou hast patient been of late,</p>
					<p class="i2">While I, without remorse of rhyme, or fear,</p>
					<p>Have built and laid out ground at such a rate,</p>
					<p class="i2">Dan Phoebus takes me for an auctioneer.</p>
					<p>That Poets were so from their earliest date,</p>
					<p class="i2">By Homer's "Catalogue of ships" is clear;</p>
					<p>But a mere modern must be moderate—</p>
					<p>I spare you then the furniture and plate.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The mellow Autumn came, and with it came</p>
					<p class="i2">The promised party, to enjoy its sweets.</p>
					<p>The corn is cut, the manor full of game;</p>
					<p class="i2">The pointer ranges, and the sportsman beats</p>
					<p>In russet jacket:—lynx-like in his aim;</p>
					<p class="i2">Full grows his bag, and wonder<i>ful</i> his feats.</p>
					<p>Ah, nutbrown partridges! Ah, brilliant pheasants!</p>
					<p>And ah, ye poachers!—'T is no sport for peasants.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>An English Autumn, though it hath no vines,</p>
					<p class="i2">Blushing with Bacchant coronals along</p>
					<p>The paths o'er which the far festoon entwines</p>
					<p class="i2">The red grape in the sunny lands of song,</p>
					<p>Hath yet a purchased choice of choicest wines;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MJ">[MJ]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The Claret light, and the Madeira strong.</p>
					<p>If Britain mourn her bleakness, we can tell her,</p>
					<p>The very best of vineyards is the cellar.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then, if she hath not that serene decline</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes the southern Autumn's day appear</p>
					<p>As if 't would to a second Spring resign</p>
					<p class="i2">The season, rather than to Winter drear,—</p>
					<p>Of in-door comforts still she hath a mine,—</p>
					<p class="i2">The sea-coal fires,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_677">[677]</a> the "earliest of the year;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_678">[678]</a></p>
					<p>Without doors, too, she may compete in mellow,</p>
					<p>As what is lost in green is gained in yellow.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And for the effeminate <i>villeggialura</i>—</p>
					<p class="i2">Rife with more horns than hounds—she hath the chase,</p>
					<p>So animated that it might allure a</p>
					<p class="i2">Saint from his beads to join the jocund race:</p>
					<p>Even Nimrod's self might leave the plains of Dura,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_679">[679]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And wear the Melton jacket for a space:</p>
					<p>If she hath no wild boars, she hath a tame</p>
					<p>Preserve of bores, who ought to be made game.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MK">[MK]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The noble guests,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_680">[680]</a> assembled at the Abbey,</p>
					<p class="i2">Consisted of—we give the sex the <i>pas</i>—</p>
					<p>The Duchess of Fitz-Fulke; the Countess Crabby;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_ML">[ML]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_681">[681]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The Ladies Scilly, Busey;—Miss Eclat,</p>
					<p>Miss Bombazeen, Miss Mackstay, Miss O'Tabby,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Mrs. Rabbi,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_682">[682]</a> the rich banker's squaw;</p>
					<p>Also the honourable Mrs. Sleep,</p>
					<p>Who looked a white lamb, yet was a black sheep:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With other Countesses of Blank—but rank;</p>
					<p class="i2">At once the "lie"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_683">[683]</a> and the <i>élite</i> of crowds;</p>
					<p>Who pass like water filtered in a tank,</p>
					<p class="i2">All purged and pious from their native clouds;</p>
					<p>Or paper turned to money by the Bank:</p>
					<p class="i2">No matter how or why, the passport shrouds</p>
					<p>The <i>passée</i> and the past; for good society</p>
					<p>Is no less famed for tolerance than piety,—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>That is, up to a certain point; which point</p>
					<p class="i2">Forms the most difficult in punctuation.</p>
					<p>Appearances appear to form the joint</p>
					<p class="i2">On which it hinges in a higher station;</p>
					<p>And so that no explosion cry "Aroint</p>
					<p class="i2">Thee, witch!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_684">[684]</a> or each Medea has her Jason;</p>
					<p>Or (to the point with Horace and with Pulci)<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MM">[MM]</a></p>
					<p><i>"Omne tulit punctum,</i> quæ <i>miscuit utile dulci."</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_685">[685]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I can't exactly trace their rule of right,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which hath a little leaning to a lottery.</p>
					<p>I've seen a virtuous woman put down quite</p>
					<p class="i2">By the mere combination of a coterie;</p>
					<p>Also a so-so matron boldly fight</p>
					<p class="i2">Her way back to the world by dint of plottery,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MN">[MN]</a></p>
					<p>And shine the very <i>Siria</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_686">[686]</a> of the spheres,</p>
					<p>Escaping with a few slight, scarless sneers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I have seen more than I'll say:—but we will see<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MO">[MO]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">How <i>our "villeggiatura"</i> will get on.</p>
					<p>The party might consist of thirty-three</p>
					<p class="i2">Of highest caste—the Brahmins of the <i>ton</i>.</p>
					<p>I have named a few, not foremost in degree,</p>
					<p class="i2">But ta'en at hazard as the rhyme may run.</p>
					<p>By way of sprinkling, scattered amongst these,</p>
					<p>There also were some Irish absentees.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was Parolles,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_687">[687]</a> too, the legal bully,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MP">[MP]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Who limits all his battles to the Bar</p>
					<p>And Senate: when invited elsewhere, truly,</p>
					<p class="i2">He shows more appetite for words than war.</p>
					<p>There was the young bard Rackrhyme, who had newly</p>
					<p class="i2">Come out and glimmered as a six weeks' star.</p>
					<p>There was Lord Pyrrho, too, the great freethinker;</p>
					<p>And Sir John Pottledeep, the mighty drinker.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was the Duke of Dash,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_688">[688]</a> who was a—duke,</p>
					<p class="i2">"Aye, every inch a" duke; there were twelve peers</p>
					<p>Like Charlemagne's—and all such peers in <i>look</i></p>
					<p class="i2">And <i>intellect</i>, that neither eyes nor ears</p>
					<p>For commoners had ever them mistook.</p>
					<p class="i2">There were the six Miss Rawbolds—pretty dears!</p>
					<p>All song and sentiment; whose hearts were set</p>
					<p>Less on a convent than a coronet.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There were four Honourable Misters, whose</p>
					<p class="i2">Honour was more before their names than after;</p>
					<p>There was the <i>preux Chevalier de la Ruse</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_689">[689]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Whom France and Fortune lately deigned to waft here,</p>
					<p>Whose chiefly harmless talent was to amuse;</p>
					<p class="i2">But the clubs found it rather serious laughter,</p>
					<p>Because—such was his magic power to please—</p>
					<p>The dice seemed charmed, too, with his repartees.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was Dick Dubious,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_690">[690]</a> the metaphysician,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who loved philosophy and a good dinner;</p>
					<p>Angle, the <i>soi-disant</i> mathematician;</p>
					<p class="i2">Sir Henry Silvercup, the great race-winner.</p>
					<p>There was the Reverend Rodomont Precisian,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who did not hate so much the sin as sinner:</p>
					<p>And Lord Augustus Fitz-Plantagenet,</p>
					<p>Good at all things, but better at a bet.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was Jack Jargon, the gigantic guardsman;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_691">[691]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And General Fireface,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_692">[692]</a> famous in the field,</p>
					<p>A great tactician, and no less a swordsman,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who ate, last war, more Yankees than he killed.</p>
					<p>There was the waggish Welsh Judge, Jefferies Hardsman,</p>
					<p class="i2">In his grave office so completely skilled,</p>
					<p>That when a culprit came for condemnation,</p>
					<p>He had his Judge's joke for consolation.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_693">[693]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Good company's a chess-board—there are kings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Queens, bishops, knights, rooks, pawns; the World's a game;</p>
					<p>Save that the puppets pull at their own strings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Methinks gay Punch hath something of the same.</p>
					<p>My Muse, the butterfly hath but her wings,</p>
					<p class="i2">Not stings, and flits through ether without aim,</p>
					<p>Alighting rarely:—were she but a hornet,</p>
					<p>Perhaps there might be vices which would mourn it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I had forgotten—but must not forget—</p>
					<p class="i2">An orator, the latest of the session,</p>
					<p>Who had delivered well a very set</p>
					<p class="i2">Smooth speech, his first and maidenly transgression</p>
					<p>Upon debate: the papers echoed yet</p>
					<p class="i2">With his <i>début</i>, which made a strong impression,</p>
					<p>And ranked with what is every day displayed—</p>
					<p>"The best first speech that ever yet was made."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Proud of his "Hear hims!" proud, too, of his vote,</p>
					<p class="i2">And lost virginity of oratory,</p>
					<p>Proud of his learning (just enough to quote),</p>
					<p class="i2">He revelled in his Ciceronian glory:</p>
					<p>With memory excellent to get by rote,</p>
					<p class="i2">With wit to hatch a pun or tell a story,</p>
					<p>Graced with some merit, and with more effrontery,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MQ">[MQ]</a></p>
					<p>"His country's pride," he came down to the country.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There also were two wits by acclamation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Longbow from Ireland,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_694">[694]</a> Strongbow from the Tweed<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_695">[695]</a>—Both</p>
					<p>lawyers and both men of education—</p>
					<p class="i2">But Strongbow's wit was of more polished breed;</p>
					<p>Longbow was rich in an imagination</p>
					<p class="i2">As beautiful and bounding as a steed,</p>
					<p>But sometimes stumbling over a potato,—</p>
					<p>While Strongbow's best things might have come from Cato.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Strongbow was like a new-tuned harpsichord;</p>
					<p class="i2">But Longbow wild as an Æolian harp,</p>
					<p>With which the Winds of heaven can claim accord,</p>
					<p class="i2">And make a music, whether flat or sharp.</p>
					<p>Of Strongbow's talk you would not change a word:</p>
					<p class="i2">At Longbow's phrases you might sometimes carp:</p>
					<p>Both wits—one born so, and the other bred—</p>
					<p>This by his heart—his rival by his head.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If all these seem an heterogeneous mass</p>
					<p class="i2">To be assembled at a country seat,</p>
					<p>Yet think, a specimen of every class</p>
					<p class="i2">Is better than a humdrum tête-à-tête.</p>
					<p>The days of Comedy are gone, alas!</p>
					<p class="i2">When Congreve's fool could vie with Molière's <i>bête</i>:</p>
					<p>Society is smoothed to that excess,</p>
					<p>That manners hardly differ more than dress.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Our ridicules are kept in the back-ground—</p>
					<p class="i2">Ridiculous enough, but also dull;</p>
					<p>Professions, too, are no more to be found</p>
					<p class="i2">Professional; and there is nought to cull<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MR">[MR]</a></p>
					<p>Of Folly's fruit; for though your fools abound,</p>
					<p class="i2">They're barren, and not worth the pains to pull.</p>
					<p>Society is now one polished horde,</p>
					<p>Formed of two mighty tribes, the <i>Bores</i> and <i>Bored</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But from being farmers, we turn gleaners, gleaning</p>
					<p class="i2">The scanty but right-well threshed ears of Truth;</p>
					<p>And, gentle reader! when you gather meaning,</p>
					<p class="i2">You may be Boaz, and I—modest Ruth.</p>
					<p>Further I'd quote, but Scripture intervening</p>
					<p class="i2">Forbids. A great impression in my youth</p>
					<p>Was made by Mrs. Adams, where she cries,</p>
					<p>"That Scriptures out of church are blasphemies."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_696">[696]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But what we can we glean in this vile age<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MS">[MS]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Of chaff, although our gleanings be not grist.</p>
					<p>I must not quite omit the talking sage,</p>
					<p class="i2">Kit-Cat, the famous Conversationist,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_697">[697]</a></p>
					<p>Who, in his common-place book, had a page</p>
					<p class="i2">Prepared each morn for evenings. "List, oh list!"</p>
					<p>"Alas, poor ghost!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_698">[698]</a>—What unexpected woes</p>
					<p>Await those who have studied their <i>bons-mots!</i></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Firstly, they must allure the conversation,</p>
					<p class="i2">By many windings to their clever clinch;</p>
					<p>And secondly, must let slip no occasion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor <i>bate</i> (abate) their hearers of an <i>inch</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MT">[MT]</a></p>
					<p>But take an ell—and make a great sensation,</p>
					<p class="i2">If possible; and thirdly, never flinch</p>
					<p>When some smart talker puts them to the test,</p>
					<p>But seize the last word, which no doubt's the best.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lord Henry and his lady were the hosts;</p>
					<p class="i2">The party we have touched on were the guests.</p>
					<p>Their table was a board to tempt even ghosts</p>
					<p class="i2">To pass the Styx for more substantial feasts.</p>
					<p>I will not dwell upon <i>ragoûts</i> or roasts,</p>
					<p class="i2">Albeit all human history attests</p>
					<p>That happiness for Man—the hungry sinner!—</p>
					<p>Since Eve ate apples, much depends on dinner.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>C.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Witness the lands which "flowed with milk and honey,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Held out unto the hungry Israelites:</p>
					<p>To this we have added since, the love of money,</p>
					<p class="i2">The only sort of pleasure which requites.</p>
					<p>Youth fades, and leaves our days no longer sunny;</p>
					<p class="i2">We tire of mistresses and parasites;</p>
					<p>But oh, ambrosial cash! Ah! who would lose thee?</p>
					<p>When we no more can use, or even abuse thee!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The gentlemen got up betimes to shoot,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or hunt: the young, because they liked the sport—</p>
					<p>The first thing boys like after play and fruit;</p>
					<p class="i2">The middle-aged, to make the day more short;</p>
					<p>For <i>ennui</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_699">[699]</a> is a growth of English root,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though nameless in our language:—we retort</p>
					<p>The fact for words, and let the French translate</p>
					<p>That awful yawn which sleep can not abate.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The elderly walked through the library,</p>
					<p class="i2">And tumbled books, or criticised the pictures,</p>
					<p>Or sauntered through the gardens piteously,</p>
					<p class="i2">And made upon the hot-house several strictures,</p>
					<p>Or rode a nag which trotted not too high,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or on the morning papers read their lectures,</p>
					<p>Or on the watch their longing eyes would fix,</p>
					<p>Longing at sixty for the hour of six.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But none were <i>gêné</i>: the great hour of union</p>
					<p class="i2">Was rung by dinner's knell; till then all were</p>
					<p>Masters of their own time—or in communion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or solitary, as they chose to bear</p>
					<p>The hours, which how to pass is but to few known.</p>
					<p class="i2">Each rose up at his own, and had to spare</p>
					<p>What time he chose for dress, and broke his fast</p>
					<p>When, where, and how he chose for that repast.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The ladies—some rouged, some a little pale—</p>
					<p class="i2">Met the morn as they might. If fine, they rode,</p>
					<p>Or walked; if foul, they read, or told a tale,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sung, or rehearsed the last dance from abroad;</p>
					<p>Discussed the fashion which might next prevail,</p>
					<p class="i2">And settled bonnets by the newest code,</p>
					<p>Or crammed twelve sheets into one little letter,</p>
					<p>To make each correspondent a new debtor.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For some had absent lovers, all had friends;</p>
					<p class="i2">The earth has nothing like a she epistle,</p>
					<p>And hardly Heaven—because it never ends—</p>
					<p class="i2">I love the mystery of a female missal,</p>
					<p>Which, like a creed, ne'er says all it intends,</p>
					<p class="i2">But full of cunning as Ulysses' whistle,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_MU">[MU]</a></p>
					<p>When he allured poor Dolon:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_700">[700]</a>—you had better</p>
					<p>Take care what you reply to such a letter.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then there were billiards; cards, too, but <i>no</i> dice;—</p>
					<p class="i2">Save in the clubs no man of honour plays;—</p>
					<p>Boats when 't was water, skating when 't was ice,</p>
					<p class="i2">And the hard frost destroyed the scenting days:</p>
					<p>And angling, too, that solitary vice,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whatever Izaak Walton sings or says:</p>
					<p>The quaint, old, cruel coxcomb, in his gullet</p>
					<p>Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_701">[701]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With evening came the banquet and the wine;</p>
					<p class="i2">The conversazione—the duet</p>
					<p>Attuned by voices more or less divine</p>
					<p class="i2">(My heart or head aches with the memory yet).</p>
					<p>The four Miss Rawbolds in a glee would shine;</p>
					<p class="i2">But the two youngest loved more to be set</p>
					<p>Down to the harp—because to Music's charms</p>
					<p>They added graceful necks, white hands and arms.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sometimes a dance (though rarely on field days,</p>
					<p class="i2">For then the gentlemen were rather tired)</p>
					<p>Displayed some sylph-like figures in its maze;</p>
					<p class="i2">Then there was small-talk ready when required;</p>
					<p>Flirtation—but decorous; the mere praise</p>
					<p class="i2">Of charms that should or should not be admired.</p>
					<p>The hunters fought their fox-hunt o'er again,</p>
					<p>And then retreated soberly—at ten.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The politicians, in a nook apart,</p>
					<p class="i2">Discussed the World, and settled all the spheres:</p>
					<p>The wits watched every loophole for their art,</p>
					<p class="i2">To introduce a <i>bon-mot</i> head and ears;</p>
					<p>Small is the rest of those who would be smart,</p>
					<p class="i2">A moment's good thing may have cost them years</p>
					<p>Before they find an hour to introduce it;</p>
					<p>And then, even <i>then</i>, some bore may make them lose it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But all was gentle and aristocratic</p>
					<p class="i2">In this our party; polished, smooth, and cold,</p>
					<p>As Phidian forms cut out of marble Attic.</p>
					<p class="i2">There now are no Squire Westerns, as of old;</p>
					<p>And our Sophias are not so emphatic,</p>
					<p class="i2">But fair as then, or fairer to behold:</p>
					<p>We have no accomplished blackguards, like Tom Jones,</p>
					<p>But gentlemen in stays, as stiff as stones.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They separated at an early hour;</p>
					<p class="i2">That is, ere midnight—which is London's noon:</p>
					<p>But in the country ladies seek their bower</p>
					<p class="i2">A little earlier than the waning moon.</p>
					<p>Peace to the slumbers of each folded flower—</p>
					<p class="i2">May the rose call back its true colour soon!</p>
					<p>Good hours of fair cheeks are the fairest tinters,</p>
					<p>And lower the price of rouge—at least some winters.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_702">[702]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_653"><span class="label">[653]</span></a> Fy. 12<sup>th</sup> 1823.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_654"><span class="label">[654]</span></a> {482}[The allusion is to the refrain of Canning's verses on Pitt, "The Pilot that weathered the storm." Compare, too, "The daring pilot in extremity" (i.e. the Earl of Shaftesbury), who "sought the storms" (Dryden's <i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>, lines 159-161).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_655"><span class="label">[655]</span></a> [Johnson loved "dear, dear Bathurst," because he was "a very good hater."—See Boswell's <i>Johnson</i>, 1876, p. 78 (Croker's <i>footnote</i>).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_656"><span class="label">[656]</span></a> {483}[So, too, Charles Kingsley, in <i>Westward Ho!</i> ii. 299, 300, calls <i>Don Quixote</i> "the saddest of books in spite of all its wit."—<i>Notes and Queries</i>, Second Series, iii. 124.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LX"><span class="label">[LX]</span></a> <i>By that great Epic</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_657"><span class="label">[657]</span></a> {484}["Your husband is in his old lunes again." <i>Merry Wives of Windsor</i>, act iv. sc. 2, lines 16, 17.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_658"><span class="label">[658]</span></a> ["Davus sum, non Oedipus." Terence, <i>Andria,</i> act i. sc. 2, line 23.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_659"><span class="label">[659]</span></a> {485}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["'T is not in mortals to command success,</p>
							<p>But we'll do more, Sempronius—we'll deserve it."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Addison's <i>Cato</i>, act i. sc. 2, ed. 1777, ii. 77.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_660"><span class="label">[660]</span></a> {487}[Compare—"The colt that's backed and burthened being young." <i>Venus and Adonis</i>, lxx. line 5.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_661"><span class="label">[661]</span></a> [To "break square," or "squares," is to interrupt the regular order, as in the proverbial phrase, "It breaks no squares," i.e. does no harm—does not matter. Compare Sterne, <i>Tristram Shandy</i> (1802), ii. v. 152, "This fault in Trim <i>broke no squares</i> with them" (<i>N. Engl. Dict.</i>, art. "Break," No. 46). The origin of the phrase is uncertain, but it may, perhaps, refer to military tactics. Shakespeare (<i>Henry V.</i>, act iv. sc. 2, line 28) speaks of "squares of battle."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_662">
							<span class="label">[662]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"With every thing that pretty <i>bin</i>,</p>
							<p>My lady sweet, arise."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Cymbeline</i>, act ii. sc. 3, lines, 25, 26.</p>
					<p>[So Warburton and Hanmer. The folio reads "that pretty is." See Knight's <i>Shakespeare</i>, Pictorial Edition, <i>Tragedies</i>, i. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_663"><span class="label">[663]</span></a> {488}[The house which Byron occupied, 1815-1816, No. 13, Piccadilly Terrace, was the property of Elizabeth, Duchess of Devonshire.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LY"><span class="label">[LY]</span></a> {489}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>The slightest obstacle which may encumber</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>The path downhill is something grand</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_LZ"><span class="label">[LZ]</span></a> <i>Not even in fools who howsoever blind</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MA"><span class="label">[MA]</span></a> {490}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>That anything is new to a Chinese</i>;</p>
							<p><i>And such is Europe's fashionable ease</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MB"><span class="label">[MB]</span></a> {491}<i>A hidden wine beneath an icy presence</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MC"><span class="label">[MC]</span></a> <i>Though this we hope has been reserved for this age</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_664"><span class="label">[664]</span></a> ["For the creed of Zoroaster," see Sir Walter Scott, <i>Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft</i>, 1830, pp. 87, 88. (See, too, <i>Cain</i>, act ii. sc. 2, line 404, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 254, note 2.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_665"><span class="label">[665]</span></a> {492}"Arcades ambo." [Virgil, <i>Bucol.</i>, Ecl. vii. 4.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_666"><span class="label">[666]</span></a> {493}[So travel the rich.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MD"><span class="label">[MD]</span></a> {494}<i>—the noble host intends</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_667"><span class="label">[667]</span></a> ["Judicious drank, and greatly-daring dined." Pope, <i>Dunciad</i>, iv. 318.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_668"><span class="label">[668]</span></a> {495}[Byron's description of the place of his inheritance, which was to know him no more, is sketched from memory, but it unites the charm of a picture with the accuracy of a ground-plan. Eight years had gone by since he had looked his last on "venerable arch" and "lucid lake" (see "Epistle to Augusta," stanza viii. lines 7, 8), but he had not forgotten, he could not forget, that enchanted and enchanting scene.</p>
					<p>Newstead Abbey or Priory was founded by Henry II., by way of deodand or expiation for the murder of Thomas Becket. Lands which bordered the valley of the Leen, and which had formed part of Sherwood Forest, were assigned for the use and endowment of a chapter of "black canons regular of the order of St. Augustine," and on a site, by the river-side to the south of the forest uplands (stanza lv. lines 5-8) the new stede, or place, or station, arose. It was a "Norman Abbey" (stanza lv. line 1) which the Black Canons dedicated to Our Lady, and, here and there, in the cloisters, traces of Norman architecture remain, but the enlargement and completion of the monastery was carried out in successive stages and "transition periods," in a style or styles which, perhaps, more by hap than by cunning, Byron rightly named "mixed Gothic" (stanza lv. line 4). To work their mills, and perhaps to drain the marshy valley, the monks dammed the Leen and excavated a chain of lakes—the largest to the north-west, Byron's "lucid lake;" a second to the south of the Abbey; and a third, now surrounded with woods, and overlooked by the "wicked lord's" "ragged rock" below the Abbey, half a mile to the south-east. The "cascade," which flows over and through a stone-work sluice, and forms a rocky water-fall, issues from the upper lake, and is in full view of the west front of the Abbey. Almost at right angles to these lakes are three ponds: the Forest Pond to the north of the stone wall, which divides the garden from the forest; the square "Eagle" Pond in the Monks' Garden; and the narrow stew-pond, bordered on either side with overhanging yews, which drains into the second or Garden Lake. Byron does not enlarge on this double chain of lakes and ponds, and, perhaps for the sake of pictorial unity, converts the second (if a second then existed) and third lakes into a river.</p>
					<p>The Abbey, which, at the dissolution of monasteries in 1539, was handed over by Henry VIII. to Sir John Byron, "steward and warden of the forest of Shirewood," was converted, here and there, more or less, into a baronial "mansion" (stanza lxvi.). It is, roughly speaking, a square block of buildings, flanking the sides of a grassy quadrangle. Surrounding the quadrangle are two-storied cloisters, and in the centre a "Gothic fountain" (stanza lxv. line 1) of composite workmanship. The upper portion of the stonework is hexagonal, and is ornamented with a double row of gargoyles (all "monsters" and no "saints," recalling, perhaps identical with, the "seven deadly sins" gargoyles, still <i>in situ</i> in the quadrangle of Magdalen College, Oxford); the lower half, which belongs to the seventeenth or eighteenth century, is hollowed into niches of a Roman or classical design. (In Byron's time the fountain stood in a courtyard in front of the Abbey, but before he composed this canto it had been restored by Colonel Wildman to its original place within the quadrangle. Byron was acquainted with the change, and writes accordingly.) When the Byrons took possession of the Abbey the upper stories of the cloisters were converted, on three sides of the quadrangle, into galleries, and on the fourth, the north side, into a library. Abutting on the cloisters are the monastic buildings proper, in part transformed, but with "much of the monastic" preserved. On the west, the front of the Abbey, the ground floor consists of the entrance hall and Monks' Parlour, and, above, the Guests' Refectory or Banqueting-hall, and the Prior's Parlour. On the south, the Xenodochium or Guesten Hall, and, above, the Monks' Refectory, or Grand Drawing-room; on the south and east, on the ground floor, the Prior's Lodgings, the Chapter House ("the exquisite small chapel," stanza lxvi. line 5), the "slype" or passage between church and Chapter House; and in the upper story, the state bedrooms, named after the kings, Edward III., Henry VII., etc., who, by the terms of the grant of land to the Prior and Canons, were entitled to free quarters in the Abbey. During Byron's brief tenure of Newstead, and for long years before, these "huge halls, long galleries, and spacious chambers" (stanza lxxvii. line 1) were half dismantled, and in a more or less ruinous condition. A few pictures remained on the walls of the Great Drawing-room, of the Prior's Parlour, and in the apartments of the south-east wing or annexe, which dates from the seventeenth century (see the account of a visit to Newstead in 1812, in <i>Beauties of England and Wales</i>, 1813, xii. 401-405). There are and were portraits, by Lely (stanza lxviii. line 7), of a Lady Byron, of Fanny Jennings, Duchess of Tyrconnel, "loveliness personified," of Mrs. Hughes, and of Nell Gwynne; by Sir Godfrey Kneller, of William and Mary; by unnamed artists, of George I. and George II.; and by Ramsay, of George III. There are portraits of a fat Prior, William Sandall, with a jewelled reliquary; of "Sir John the Little with the Great Beard," who ruled in the Prior's stead; and there is the portrait, a votive tablet of penitence and remorse, "of that Lord Arundel Who struck in heat the child he loved so well" (see "A Picture at Newstead," by Matthew Arnold, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1890, p. 177); but of portraits of judges or bishops, or of pictures by old masters, there is neither trace nor record.</p>
					<p>But the characteristic feature of Newstead Abbey, so familiar that description seems unnecessary, and, yet, never quite accurately described, is the west front of the Priory Church, which is in line with the west front of the Abbey. "Half apart," the southern portion of this front, which abuts on the windows of the Prior's Parlour, and the room above, where Byron slept, flanks and conceals the west end of the north cloisters and library; but, with this exception, it is a screen, and nothing more. In the centre is the "mighty window" (stanza lxii. line 1), shorn of glass and tracery; above are six lancet windows (which Byron seems to have regarded as niches), and, above again, in a "higher niche" (stanza lxi. line 1), is the crowned Virgin with the Babe in her arms, which escaped, as by a miracle, the "fiery darts"—the shot and cannon-balls of the Cromwellian troopers. On either side of the central window are "two blank windows containing tracery ['geometrical decorated'] ... carved [in relief] on the solid ashlar;" on either side of the window, and at the northern and southern extremities of the front, are buttresses with canopied niches, in each of which a saint or apostle must once have stood. Over the west door there is the mutilated figure of (?) the Saviour, but of twelve saints or twelve niches there is no trace. The "grand arch" is an ivy-clad screen, and nothing more. Behind and beyond, in place of vanished nave, of aisle and transept, is the smooth green turf; and at the east end, on the site of the high altar, stands the urn-crowned masonry of Boatswain's tomb.</p>
					<p>Newstead Abbey was sold by Lord Byron to his old schoolfellow, Colonel Thomas Wildman, in November, 1817. The house and property were resold in 1861, by his widow, to William Frederick Webb, Esq., a traveller in many lands, the friend and host of David Livingstone. At his death the estate was inherited by his daughter, Miss Geraldine Webb, who was married to General Sir Herbert Charles Chermside, G.C.M.G., etc., Governor of Queensland, in 1899.</p>
					<p>For Newstead Abbey, see <i>Beauties of England and Wales</i>, 1813, xii. Part I. 401-405 (often reprinted without acknowledgment); <i>Abbotsford and Newstead Abbey</i>, by Washington Irving, 1835; <i>Journal of the Archaeological Association</i> (papers by T.J. Pettigrew, F.R.S., and Arthur Ashpitel, F.S.A.), 1854, vol. ix. pp. 14-39; and <i>A Souvenir of Newstead Abbey</i> (illustrated by a series of admirable photographs), by Richard Allen, Nottingham, 1874, etc., etc.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_669"><span class="label">[669]</span></a> {497}[The woodlands were sacrificed to the needs or fancies of Byron's great-uncle, the "wicked Lord." One splendid oak, known as the "Pilgrim's Oak," which stood and stands near the north lodge of the park, near the "Hut," was bought in by the neighbouring gentry, and made over to the estate. Perhaps by the Druid oak Byron meant to celebrate this "last of the clan," which, in his day, before the woods were replanted, must have stood out in solitary grandeur.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_670"><span class="label">[670]</span></a> {498}[Compare "Epistle to Augusta," stanza x. line 1, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 68.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_671"><span class="label">[671]</span></a> [The little wood which Byron planted at the south-east corner of the upper or "Stable" Lake, known as "Poet's Corner," still slopes to the water's brink. Nor have the wild-fowl diminished. The lower of the three lakes is specially reserved as a breeding-place.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_ME"><span class="label">[ME]</span></a> <i>Its shriller echo</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MF">
							<span class="label">[MF]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Which sympathized with Time's and Tempest's march,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>In gazing on that high and haughty Arch</i>.—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_672"><span class="label">[672]</span></a> {499}[See lines "On Leaving Newstead Abbey," stanza 5, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 3, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MG"><span class="label">[MG]</span></a> <i>But in the stillness of the moon</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_673"><span class="label">[673]</span></a> {500}[<i>Vide ante</i>, <i>The Deformed Transformed</i>, Part I. line 532, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 497.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_674"><span class="label">[674]</span></a> This is not a frolic invention: it is useless to specify the spot, or in what county, but I have heard it both alone and in company with those who will never hear it more. It can, of course, be accounted for by some natural or accidental cause, but it was a strange sound, and unlike any other I have ever heard (and I have heard many above and below the surface of the earth produced in ruins, etc., etc., or caverns).—[MS.]</p>
					<p>["The unearthly sound" may still be heard at rare intervals, but it is difficult to believe that the "huge arch" can act as an Æolian harp. Perhaps the smaller lancet windows may vocalize the wind.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MH"><span class="label">[MH]</span></a> {501}<i>Prouder of such a toy than of their breed</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_675"><span class="label">[675]</span></a> {502}Salvator Rosa. The wicked necessity of rhyming obliges me to adapt the name to the verse.—[MS.]</p>
					<p>[Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Whate'er Lorraine light touch'd with softening hue,</p>
							<p>Or <i>savage</i> Rosa dash'd, or learned Poussin drew."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Thomson's <i>Castle of Indolence</i>, Canto I. stanza xxxviii. lines 8, 9.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_676"><span class="label">[676]</span></a> If I err not, "your Dane" is one of Iago's catalogue of nations "exquisite in their drinking."</p>
					<p>["Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander—drink hoa! are nothing to your English." "Is your Englishman so exquisite in his drinking?" (So Collier and Knight. The Quarto reads "expert").—<i>Othello</i>, act ii. sc. 3, lines 71-74.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MI">
							<span class="label">[MI]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>His bell-mouthed goblet—and his laughing group</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Provoke my thirst—what ho! a flask of Rhenish</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MJ"><span class="label">[MJ]</span></a> {503}<i>Hath yet at night the very best of wines.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_677"><span class="label">[677]</span></a> ["Sea-coal" (i.e. Newcastle coal), as distinguished from "charcoal" and "earth-coal." But the qualification must have been unusual and old-fashioned in 1822. "Earth-coal" is found in large quantities on the Newstead estate, and the Abbey, far below its foundations, is tunnelled by a coal-drift.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_678"><span class="label">[678]</span></a> [See Gray's <i>omitted</i> stanza—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"'Here scatter'd oft, <i>the earliest</i> of the year,</p>
							<p class="i2">By hands unseen, are showers of violets found;</p>
							<p class="i2">The red-breast loves to build and warble here,</p>
							<p class="i2">And little footsteps lightly print the ground.'</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>As fine ... as any in his Elegy. I wonder that he could have the heart to omit it."—"Extracts from a Diary," February 27, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 210. The stanza originally preceded the Epitaph.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_679"><span class="label">[679]</span></a> {504}In Assyria. [See <i>Daniel</i> iii. 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MK">
							<span class="label">[MK]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i15">—— <i>she hath the tame</i></p>
							<p><i>Preserved within doors—why not make them Game?</i>—[MS.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_680"><span class="label">[680]</span></a> [It is difficult, if not impossible, to furnish a clue to the names of all the guests at Norman Abbey. Some who are included in this ghostly "house-party" seem to be, and, perhaps, were meant to be, <i>nomina umbrarum</i>; and others are, undoubtedly, contemporary celebrities, under a more or less transparent disguise. A few of these shadows have been substantiated (<i>vide infra, et post</i>), but the greater part decline to be materialized or verified.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_ML"><span class="label">[ML]</span></a>—— <i>the Countess Squabby.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_681"><span class="label">[681]</span></a> [Perhaps Mary, widow of the eighth Earl of Cork and Orrery: "Dowager Cork," "Old Corky," of Joseph Jekyll's <i>Correspondence</i>, 1894, pp. 83, 275.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_682"><span class="label">[682]</span></a> [Mrs. Rabbi may be Mrs. Coutts, the Mrs. Million of <i>Vivian Grey</i> (1826, i. 183), who arrived at "Château Desir in a crimson silk pelisse, hat and feathers, with diamond ear-rings, and a rope of gold round her neck."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_683"><span class="label">[683]</span></a> {505}[Lie, lye, or ley, is a solution of potassium salts obtained by bleaching wood-ashes. Byron seems to have confused "lie" with "lee," i.e. dregs, sediment.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_684"><span class="label">[684]</span></a> [<i>"Aroint thee, witch!</i> the rump-fed ronyon cries." <i>Macbeth</i>, act ii. sc. 3, line 6.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MM"><span class="label">[MM]</span></a> <i>Or (to come to the point, like my friend Pulci)</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_685"><span class="label">[685]</span></a> [Hor., <i>Epist. Ad Pisones</i>, line 343.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MN"><span class="label">[MN]</span></a>—— <i>by fear or flattery</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_686"><span class="label">[686]</span></a> Siria, i.e. bitch-star.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MO"><span class="label">[MO]</span></a> <i>I have seen—no matter what—we now shall see</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_687"><span class="label">[687]</span></a> {506}[Parolles [see <i>All's Well that Ends Well</i>, <i>passim</i>] is Brougham (<i>vide ante</i>, the suppressed stanzas, Canto I. <a class="pginternal" href="#Footnote_83">pp. 67-69</a>). It is possible that this stanza was written after the Canto as a whole was finished. But, if not, an incident which took place in the House of Commons, April 17, 1823, during a debate on Catholic Emancipation, may be quoted in corroboration of Brougham's unreadiness with regard to the point of honour. In the course of his speech he accused Canning of "monstrous truckling for the purpose of obtaining office," and Canning, without waiting for Brougham to finish, gave him the lie: "I rise to say that that is false" (<i>Parl. Deb.</i>, N.S. vol. 8, p. 1091).</p>
					<p>There was a "scene," which ended in an exchange of explanations and quasi-apologies, and henceforth, as a rule, parliamentary insults were given and received without recourse to duelling. Byron was not aware that the "old order" had passed or was passing. Compare Hazlitt, in <i>The Spirit of the Age</i>, 1825, pp. 302, 303: "He [Brougham] is adventurous, but easily panic-struck, and sacrifices the vanity of self-opinion to the necessity of self-preservation ... himself the first to get out of harm's way and escape from the danger;" and Mr. Parthenopex Puff (W. Stewart Rose), in <i>Vivian Grey</i> (1826, i. 186, 187), "Oh! he's a prodigious fellow! What do you think Booby says? he says, that Foaming Fudge [Brougham] can do more than any man in Great Britain; that he had one day to plead in the King's Bench, spout at a tavern, speak in the House, and fight a duel—and that he found time for everything but the <i>last</i>."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MP"><span class="label">[MP]</span></a> <i>There was, too, Henry B</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_688"><span class="label">[688]</span></a> [In his Journal for December 5, 1813, Byron writes: "The Duke of —— called.... His Grace is a good, noble, ducal person" (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 361). Possibly the earlier "Duke of Dash" was William Spencer, sixth Duke of Devonshire, an old schoolfellow of Byron's, who was eager to renew the acquaintance (<i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 98, note 2); and, if so, he may be reckoned as one of the guests of "Norman Abbey."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_689"><span class="label">[689]</span></a> {507}[Gronow (<i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, i. 234-240) identifies the <i>Chevalier de la Ruse</i> with Casimir Comte de Montrond (1768-1843), back-stairs diplomatist, wit, gambler, and man of fashion. He was the lifelong companion, if not friend, of Talleyrand, who pleaded for him: "Qui est-ce qui ne l'aimerait pas, il est si vicieux!" At one time in the pay of Napoleon, he fell under his displeasure, and, to avoid arrest, spent two years of exile (1812-14) in England. "He was not," says Gronow, "a great talker, nor did he swagger ... or laugh at his own <i>bons-mots</i>. He was demure, sleek, sly, and dangerous.... In the London clubs he went by the name of Old French." He was a constant guest of the Duke of York's at Oatlands, "and won much at his whist-table" (<i>English Whist</i>, by W.P. Courtney, 1894, p. 181). For his second residence in England, and for a sketch by D'Orsay, see <i>A Portion of the Journal, etc.</i>, by Thomas Raikes, 1857, frontispiece to vol. iv., <i>et</i> vols. i.-iv. <i>passim</i>. See, for biographical notice, <i>L'Ami de M. de Talleyrand</i>, par Henri Welschinger, <i>La Revue de Paris</i>, 1895, Fev., tom. i. pp. 640-654.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_690"><span class="label">[690]</span></a> [Perhaps Sir James Mackintosh—a frequent guest at Holland House.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_691"><span class="label">[691]</span></a> {508}[Possibly Colonel (afterwards Sir James) Macdonell [d. 1857], "a man of colossal stature," who occupied and defended the Château of Hougoumont on the night before the battle of Waterloo. (See Gronow, <i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, i. 76, 77.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_692"><span class="label">[692]</span></a> [Sir George Prevost (1767-1816), the Governor-General of British North America, and nominally Commander-in-chief of the Army in the second American War, contributed, by his excess of caution, supineness, and delay, to the humiliation of the British forces. The particular allusion is to his alleged inaction at a critical moment in the engagement of September 11, 1814, between Commodore Macdonough and Captain Downie in Plattsburg Bay. "A letter was sent to Capt. Downie, strongly urging him to come on, as the army had long been waiting for his co-operation.... The brave Downie replied that he required no urging to do his duty.... He was as good as his word. The guns were scaled when he got under way, upon hearing which Sir George issued an <i>order</i> for the troops to <i>cook</i>, instead of <i>that of instant co-operation</i>."—To Editor of the <i>Montreal Herald</i>, May 23, 1815, <i>Letters of Veritas</i>, 1815, pp. 116, 117. See, too, <i>The Quarterly Review</i>, July, 1822, vol. xxvii. p. 446.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_693"><span class="label">[693]</span></a> [George Hardinge (1744-1816), who was returned M.P. for Old Sarum in 1784, was appointed, in 1787, Senior Justice of the Counties of Brecon, Glamorgan, and Radnor. According to the <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>, 1816 (vol. lxxxvi. p. 563), "In conversation he had few equals.... He delighted in pleasantries, and always afforded to his auditors abundance of mirth and entertainment as well as information." Byron seems to have supposed that these "pleasantries" found their way into his addresses to condemned prisoners, but if the charges printed in his <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, edited by John Nichols in 1818, are reported in full, he was entirely mistaken. They are tedious, but the "waggery" is conspicuous by its absence.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MQ"><span class="label">[MQ]</span></a> {509}<i>With all his laurels growing upon one tree</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_694"><span class="label">[694]</span></a> [John Philpot Curran (1750-1817). "Did you know Curran?" asked Byron of Lady Blessington (<i>Conversations</i>, 1834, p. 176); "he was the most wonderful person I ever saw. In him was combined an imagination the most brilliant and profound, with a flexibility and wit that would have justified the observation applied to——that his heart was in his head." (See, too, <i>Detached Thoughts</i>, No. 24, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 421.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_695"><span class="label">[695]</span></a> [For Thomas Lord Erskine (1750-1823), see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 390, note 5. See, too, <i>Detached Thoughts</i>, No. 93, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 455, 456. In his <i>Spirit of the Age</i>, 1825, pp. 297, 298, Hazlitt contrasts "the impassioned appeals and flashes of wit of a Curran ... the golden tide of wisdom, eloquence, and fancy of a Burke," with the "dashing and graceful manner" which concealed the poverty and "deadness" of the matter of Erskine's speeches.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MR"><span class="label">[MR]</span></a> {510}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i8">—— <i>all classes mostly pull</i></p>
							<p><i>At the same oar</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_696"><span class="label">[696]</span></a> {511}["Mrs. Adams answered Mr. Adams, that it was blasphemous to talk of Scripture out of church." This dogma was broached to her husband—the best Christian in any book.—See <i>The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews</i>, Bk. IV. chap. xi. ed. 1876, p. 324.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MS"><span class="label">[MS]</span></a> <i>—— in the ripe age.</i>—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_697"><span class="label">[697]</span></a> [Probably Richard Sharp (1759-1835), known as "Conversation Sharp." Byron frequently met him in society in 1813-14, and in "Extracts from a Diary," January 9, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 161, describes him as "the Conversationist." He visited Byron at the Villa Diodati in the autumn of 1816 (<i>Life</i>, p. 323).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_698"><span class="label">[698]</span></a> [<i>Hamlet</i>, act i. sc. 5, line 22.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MT"><span class="label">[MT]</span></a> <i>Nor bate (read bait)</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_699"><span class="label">[699]</span></a> {512}[See letters to the Earl of Blessington, April 5, 1823, <i>Letters</i>, 1891, vi. 187.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_MU"><span class="label">[MU]</span></a> {513}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p><i>But full of wisdom</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
							<p><i>A sort of rose entwining with a thistle</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_700"><span class="label">[700]</span></a> [<i>Iliad</i>, x. 341, sq.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_701"><span class="label">[701]</span></a> It would have taught him humanity at least. This sentimental savage, whom it is a mode to quote (amongst the novelists) to show their sympathy for innocent sports and old songs, teaches how to sew up frogs, and break their legs by way of experiment, in addition to the art of angling,—the cruelest, the coldest, and the stupidest of pretended sports. They may talk about the beauties of nature, but the angler merely thinks of his dish of fish; he has no leisure to take his eyes from off the streams, and a single <i>bite</i> is worth to him more than all the scenery around. Besides, some fish bite best on a rainy day. The whale, the shark, and the tunny fishery have somewhat of noble and perilous in them; even net fishing, trawling, etc., are more humane and useful. But angling!—no angler can be a good man.</p>
					<p>"One of the best men I ever knew,—as humane, delicate-minded, generous, and excellent a creature as any in the world,—was an angler: true, he angled with painted flies, and would have been incapable of the extravagancies of I. Walton."</p>
					<p>The above addition was made by a friend in reading over the MS.—"Audi alteram partem."—I leave it to counter-balance my own observation.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_702"><span class="label">[702]</span></a> {515}B. Fy. 19<sup>th</sup> 1823.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
