<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto IX</h2>
			<h3>I.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_476">[476]</a></h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, Wellington! (or "Villainton"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_477">[477]</a>—for Fame<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IT">[IT]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Sounds the heroic syllables both ways;</p>
					<p>France could not even conquer your great name,</p>
					<p class="i2">But punned it down to this facetious phrase—</p>
					<p>Beating or beaten she will laugh the same,)</p>
					<p class="i2">You have obtained great pensions and much praise:</p>
					<p>Glory like yours should any dare gainsay,</p>
					<p>Humanity would rise, and thunder "Nay!"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_478">[478]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I don't think that you used Kinnaird quite well</p>
					<p class="i2">In Marinèt's affair<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_479">[479]</a>—in fact, 't was shabby,</p>
					<p>And like some other things won't do to tell</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon your tomb in Westminster's old Abbey.</p>
					<p>Upon the rest 't is not worth while to dwell,</p>
					<p class="i2">Such tales being for the tea-hours of some tabby;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_480">[480]</a></p>
					<p>But though your years as <i>man</i> tend fast to zero,</p>
					<p>In fact your Grace is still but a <i>young Hero</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Though Britain owes (and pays you too) so much,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet Europe doubtless owes you greatly more:</p>
					<p>You have repaired Legitimacy's crutch,</p>
					<p class="i2">A prop not quite so certain as before:</p>
					<p>The Spanish, and the French, as well as Dutch,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have seen, and felt, how strongly you <i>restore</i>;</p>
					<p>And Waterloo has made the world your debtor</p>
					<p>(I wish your bards would sing it rather better).</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You are "the best of cut-throats:"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_481">[481]</a>—do not start;</p>
					<p class="i2">The phrase is Shakespeare's, and not misapplied:—</p>
					<p>War's a brain-spattering, windpipe-slitting art,</p>
					<p class="i2">Unless her cause by right be sanctified.</p>
					<p>If you have acted <i>once</i> a generous part,</p>
					<p class="i2">The World, not the World's masters, will decide,</p>
					<p>And I shall be delighted to learn who,</p>
					<p>Save you and yours, have gained by Waterloo?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I am no flatterer—you've supped full of flattery:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_482">[482]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">They say you like it too—'t is no great wonder.</p>
					<p>He whose whole life has been assault and battery,</p>
					<p class="i2">At last may get a little tired of thunder;</p>
					<p>And swallowing eulogy much more than satire, he</p>
					<p class="i2">May like being praised for every lucky blunder,</p>
					<p>Called "Saviour of the Nations"—not yet saved,—</p>
					<p>And "Europe's Liberator"—still enslaved.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_483">[483]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I've done. Now go and dine from off the plate</p>
					<p class="i2">Presented by the Prince of the Brazils,</p>
					<p>And send the sentinel before your gate</p>
					<p class="i2">A slice or two from your luxurious meals:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_484">[484]</a></p>
					<p>He fought, but has not fed so well of late.</p>
					<p class="i2">Some hunger, too, they say the people feels:—</p>
					<p>There is no doubt that you deserve your ration,</p>
					<p>But pray give back a little to the nation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I don't mean to reflect—a man so great as</p>
					<p class="i2">You, my lord Duke! is far above reflection:</p>
					<p>The high Roman fashion, too, of Cincinnatus,</p>
					<p class="i2">With modern history has but small connection:</p>
					<p>Though as an Irishman you love potatoes,</p>
					<p class="i2">You need not take them under your direction;</p>
					<p>And half a million for your Sabine farm</p>
					<p>Is rather dear!—I'm sure I mean no harm.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Great men have always scorned great recompenses:</p>
					<p class="i2">Epaminondas saved his Thebes, and died,</p>
					<p>Not leaving even his funeral expenses:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_485">[485]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">George Washington had thanks, and nought beside,</p>
					<p>Except the all-cloudless glory (which few men's is)</p>
					<p class="i2">To free his country: Pitt too had his pride,</p>
					<p>And as a high-souled Minister of state is</p>
					<p>Renowned for ruining Great Britain gratis.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_486">[486]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Never had mortal man such opportunity,</p>
					<p class="i2">Except Napoleon, or abused it more:</p>
					<p>You might have freed fallen Europe from the unity</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Tyrants, and been blest from shore to shore:</p>
					<p>And <i>now</i>—what is your fame? Shall the Muse tune it ye?</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>Now</i>—that the rabble's first vain shouts are o'er?</p>
					<p>Go! hear it in your famished country's cries!</p>
					<p>Behold the World! and curse your victories!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>As these new cantos touch on warlike feats,</p>
					<p class="i2">To <i>you</i> the unflattering Muse deigns to inscribe<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IU">[IU]</a></p>
					<p>Truths, that you will not read in the Gazettes,</p>
					<p class="i2">But which 't is time to teach the hireling tribe</p>
					<p>Who fatten on their country's gore, and debts,</p>
					<p class="i2">Must be recited—and without a bribe.</p>
					<p>You <i>did great</i> things, but not being <i>great</i> in mind,</p>
					<p>Have left <i>undone</i> the <i>greatest</i>—and mankind.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Death laughs—Go ponder o'er the skeleton</p>
					<p class="i2">With which men image out the unknown thing</p>
					<p>That hides the past world, like to a set sun</p>
					<p class="i2">Which still elsewhere may rouse a brighter spring—</p>
					<p>Death laughs at all you weep for!—look upon</p>
					<p class="i2">This hourly dread of all! whose <i>threatened sting</i></p>
					<p>Turns Life to terror, even though in its sheath:</p>
					<p>Mark! how its lipless mouth grins without breath!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Mark! how it laughs and scorns at all you are!</p>
					<p class="i2">And yet <i>was</i> what you are; from <i>ear</i> to <i>ear</i></p>
					<p>It <i>laughs not</i>—there is now no fleshy bar</p>
					<p class="i2">So called; the Antic long hath ceased to <i>hear</i>,</p>
					<p>But still he <i>smiles</i>; and whether near or far,</p>
					<p class="i2">He strips from man that mantle (far more dear</p>
					<p>Than even the tailor's), his incarnate skin,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IV">[IV]</a></p>
					<p>White, black, or copper—the dead bones will grin.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And thus Death laughs,—it is sad merriment,</p>
					<p class="i2">But still it <i>is</i> so; and with such example</p>
					<p>Why should not Life be equally content</p>
					<p class="i2">With his Superior, in a smile to trample</p>
					<p>Upon the nothings which are daily spent</p>
					<p class="i2">Like bubbles on an Ocean much less ample</p>
					<p>Than the Eternal Deluge, which devours</p>
					<p>Suns as rays—worlds like atoms—years like hours?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"To be, or not to be? <i>that</i> is the question,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Says Shakespeare,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_487">[487]</a> who just now is much in fashion.</p>
					<p>I am neither Alexander nor Hephæstion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor ever had for <i>abstract</i> fame much passion;</p>
					<p>But would much rather have a sound digestion</p>
					<p class="i2">Than Buonaparte's cancer:—could I dash on</p>
					<p>Through fifty victories to shame or fame—</p>
					<p>Without a stomach what were a good name?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p><i>"O dura ilia messorum!"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_488">[488]</a>—"Oh</p>
					<p class="i2">Ye rigid guts of reapers!" I translate<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IW">[IW]</a></p>
					<p>For the great benefit of those who know</p>
					<p class="i2">What indigestion is—that inward fate</p>
					<p>Which makes all Styx through one small liver flow.</p>
					<p class="i2">A peasant's sweat is worth his lord's estate:</p>
					<p>Let <i>this</i> one toil for bread—<i>that</i> rack for rent,</p>
					<p>He who sleeps best may be the most content.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"To be, or not to be?"—Ere I decide,</p>
					<p class="i2">I should be glad to know that which <i>is being</i>.</p>
					<p>'T is true we speculate both far and wide,</p>
					<p class="i2">And deem, because we <i>see</i>, we are <i>all-seeing</i>:</p>
					<p>For my part, I'll enlist on neither side,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until I see both sides for once agreeing.</p>
					<p>For me, I sometimes think that Life is Death,</p>
					<p>Rather than Life a mere affair of breath.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p><i>"Que scais-je"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_489">[489]</a> was the motto of Montaigne,</p>
					<p class="i2">As also of the first academicians:</p>
					<p>That all is dubious which man may attain,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was one of their most favourite positions.</p>
					<p>There's no such thing as certainty, that's plain</p>
					<p class="i2">As any of Mortality's conditions;</p>
					<p>So little do we know what we're about in</p>
					<p>This world, I doubt if doubt itself be doubting.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It is a pleasant voyage perhaps to float,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Pyrrho,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_490">[490]</a> on a sea of speculation;</p>
					<p>But what if carrying sail capsize the boat?</p>
					<p class="i2">Your wise men don't know much of navigation;</p>
					<p>And swimming long in the abyss of thought</p>
					<p class="i2">Is apt to tire: a calm and shallow station</p>
					<p>Well nigh the shore, where one stoops down and gathers</p>
					<p>Some pretty shell, is best for moderate bathers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"But Heaven," as Cassio says, "is above all—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_491">[491]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">No more of this, then, let us pray!" We have</p>
					<p>Souls to save, since Eve's slip and Adam's fall,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which tumbled all mankind into the grave,</p>
					<p>Besides fish, beasts, and birds. "The sparrow's fall</p>
					<p class="i2">Is special providence,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_492">[492]</a> though how <i>it</i> gave</p>
					<p>Offence, we know not; probably it perched</p>
					<p>Upon the tree which Eve so fondly searched.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! ye immortal Gods! what is Theogony?</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh! thou, too, mortal man! what is Philanthropy?</p>
					<p>Oh! World, which was and is, what is Cosmogony?</p>
					<p class="i2">Some people have accused me of Misanthropy;</p>
					<p>And yet I know no more than the mahogany</p>
					<p class="i2">That forms this desk, of what they mean;—<i>Lykanthropy</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_493">[493]</a></p>
					<p>I comprehend, for without transformation</p>
					<p>Men become wolves on any slight occasion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But I, the mildest, meekest of mankind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Moses, or Melancthon,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_494">[494]</a> who have ne'er<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IX">[IX]</a></p>
					<p>Done anything exceedingly unkind,—</p>
					<p class="i2">And (though I could not now and then forbear</p>
					<p>Following the bent of body or of mind)</p>
					<p class="i2">Have always had a tendency to spare,—</p>
					<p>Why do they call me Misanthrope? Because</p>
					<p><i>They hate me, not I them:</i>—and here we'll pause.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is time we should proceed with our good poem,—</p>
					<p class="i2">For I maintain that it is really good,</p>
					<p>Not only in the body but the proem,</p>
					<p class="i2">However little both are understood</p>
					<p>Just now,—but by and by the Truth will show 'em</p>
					<p class="i2">Herself in her sublimest attitude:</p>
					<p>And till she doth, I fain must be content</p>
					<p>To share her beauty and her banishment.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Our hero (and, I trust, kind reader! yours)</p>
					<p class="i2">Was left upon his way to the chief city</p>
					<p>Of the immortal Peter's polished boors,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who still have shown themselves more brave than witty.</p>
					<p>I know its mighty Empire now allures</p>
					<p class="i2">Much flattery—even Voltaire's,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_495">[495]</a> and that's a pity.</p>
					<p>For me, I deem an absolute autocrat</p>
					<p><i>Not</i> a barbarian, but much worse than that.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And I will war, at least in words (and—should</p>
					<p class="i2">My chance so happen—deeds), with all who war</p>
					<p>With Thought;—and of Thought's foes by far most rude,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tyrants and sycophants have been and are.</p>
					<p>I know not who may conquer: if I could</p>
					<p class="i2">Have such a prescience, it should be no bar</p>
					<p>To this my plain, sworn, downright detestation</p>
					<p>Of every despotism in every nation.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IY">[IY]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It is not that I adulate the people:</p>
					<p class="i2">Without <i>me</i>, there are demagogues enough,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_496">[496]</a></p>
					<p>And infidels, to pull down every steeple,</p>
					<p class="i2">And set up in their stead some proper stuff.</p>
					<p>Whether they may sow scepticism to reap Hell,</p>
					<p class="i2">As is the Christian dogma rather rough,</p>
					<p>I do not know;—I wish men to be free</p>
					<p>As much from mobs as kings—from you as me.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The consequence is, being of no party,</p>
					<p class="i2">I shall offend all parties:—never mind!</p>
					<p>My words, at least, are more sincere and hearty</p>
					<p class="i2">Than if I sought to sail before the wind.</p>
					<p>He who has nought to gain can have small art: he</p>
					<p class="i2">Who neither wishes to be bound nor bind,</p>
					<p>May still expatiate freely, as will I,</p>
					<p>Nor give my voice to slavery's jackal cry.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_IZ">[IZ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p><i>That's</i> an appropriate simile, <i>that jackal;</i>—</p>
					<p class="i2">I've heard them in the Ephesian ruins howl<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_497">[497]</a></p>
					<p>By night, as do that mercenary pack all,</p>
					<p class="i2">Power's base purveyors, who for pickings prowl,</p>
					<p>And scent the prey their masters would attack all.</p>
					<p class="i2">However, the poor jackals are less foul</p>
					<p>(As being the brave lions' keen providers)</p>
					<p>Than human insects, catering for spiders.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JA">[JA]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Raise but an arm! 't will brush their web away,</p>
					<p class="i2">And without <i>that</i>, their poison and their claws</p>
					<p>Are useless. Mind, good people! what I say—</p>
					<p class="i2">(Or rather Peoples)—<i>go on</i> without pause!</p>
					<p>The web of these Tarantulas each day</p>
					<p class="i2">Increases, till you shall make common cause:</p>
					<p>None, save the Spanish Fly and Attic Bee,</p>
					<p>As yet are strongly stinging to be free.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JB">[JB]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don Juan, who had shone in the late slaughter,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was left upon his way with the despatch,</p>
					<p>Where blood was talked of as we would of water;</p>
					<p class="i2">And carcasses that lay as thick as thatch</p>
					<p>O'er silenced cities, merely served to flatter</p>
					<p class="i2">Fair Catherine's pastime—who looked on the match</p>
					<p>Between these nations as a main of cocks,</p>
					<p>Wherein she liked her own to stand like rocks.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And there in a <i>kibitka</i> he rolled on,</p>
					<p class="i2">(A cursed sort of carriage without springs,</p>
					<p>Which on rough roads leaves scarcely a whole bone,)</p>
					<p class="i2">Pondering on Glory, Chivalry, and Kings,</p>
					<p>And Orders, and on all that he had done—</p>
					<p class="i2">And wishing that post-horses had the wings</p>
					<p>Of Pegasus, or at the least post-chaises</p>
					<p>Had feathers, when a traveller on deep ways is.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At every jolt—and they were many—still</p>
					<p class="i2">He turned his eyes upon his little charge,</p>
					<p>As if he wished that she should fare less ill</p>
					<p class="i2">Than he, in these sad highways left at large</p>
					<p>To ruts, and flints, and lovely Nature's skill,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who is no paviour, nor admits a barge</p>
					<p>On <i>her</i> canals, where God takes sea and land,</p>
					<p>Fishery and farm, both into his own hand.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At least he pays no rent, and has best right</p>
					<p class="i2">To be the first of what we used to call</p>
					<p>"Gentlemen farmers"—a race worn out quite,</p>
					<p class="i2">Since lately there have been no rents at all,</p>
					<p>And "gentlemen" are in a piteous plight,</p>
					<p class="i2">And "farmers" can't raise Ceres from her fall:</p>
					<p>She fell with Buonaparte,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_498">[498]</a>—What strange thoughts</p>
					<p>Arise, when we see Emperors fall with oats!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Juan turned his eyes on the sweet child</p>
					<p class="i2">Whom he had saved from slaughter—what a trophy</p>
					<p>Oh! ye who build up monuments, defiled</p>
					<p class="i2">With gore, like Nadir Shah,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_499">[499]</a> that costive Sophy,</p>
					<p>Who, after leaving Hindostan a wild,</p>
					<p class="i2">And scarce to the Mogul a cup of coffee</p>
					<p>To soothe his woes withal, was slain, the sinner!</p>
					<p>Because he could no more digest his dinner;—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JC">[JC]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_500">[500]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh ye! or we! or he! or she! reflect,</p>
					<p class="i2">That <i>one</i> life saved, especially if young</p>
					<p>Or pretty, is a thing to recollect</p>
					<p class="i2">Far sweeter than the greenest laurels sprung</p>
					<p>From the manure of human clay, though decked</p>
					<p class="i2">With all the praises ever said or sung:</p>
					<p>Though hymned by every harp, unless within</p>
					<p>Your heart joins chorus, Fame is but a din.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! ye great authors luminous, voluminous!</p>
					<p class="i2">Ye twice ten hundred thousand daily scribes!</p>
					<p>Whose pamphlets, volumes, newspapers, illumine us!</p>
					<p class="i2">Whether you're paid by government in bribes,</p>
					<p>To prove the public debt is not consuming us—</p>
					<p class="i2">Or, roughly treading on the "courtier's kibes"</p>
					<p>With clownish heel<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_501">[501]</a> your popular circulation</p>
					<p>Feeds you by printing half the realm's starvation;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, ye great authors!—<i>A propos des bottes,</i>—</p>
					<p class="i2">I have forgotten what I meant to say,</p>
					<p>As sometimes have been greater sages' lots;—</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was something calculated to allay</p>
					<p>All wrath in barracks, palaces, or cots:</p>
					<p class="i2">Certes it would have been but thrown away,</p>
					<p>And that's one comfort for my lost advice,</p>
					<p>Although no doubt it was beyond all price.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But let it go:—it will one day be found</p>
					<p class="i2">With other relics of "a former World,"</p>
					<p>When this World shall be <i>former,</i> underground,</p>
					<p class="i2">Thrown topsy-turvy, twisted, crisped, and curled,</p>
					<p>Baked, fried, or burnt, turned inside-out, or drowned,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like all the worlds before, which have been hurled</p>
					<p>First out of, and then back again to chaos—</p>
					<p>The superstratum which will overlay us.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JD">[JD]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>So Cuvier says:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_502">[502]</a>—and then shall come again</p>
					<p class="i2">Unto the new creation, rising out</p>
					<p>From our old crash, some mystic, ancient strain</p>
					<p class="i2">Of things destroyed and left in airy doubt;</p>
					<p>Like to the notions we now entertain</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Titans, giants, fellows of about</p>
					<p>Some hundred feet in height, <i>not</i> to say <i>miles,</i></p>
					<p>And mammoths, and your winged crocodiles.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Think if then George the Fourth should be dug up!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_503">[503]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">How the new worldlings of the then new East</p>
					<p>Will wonder where such animals could sup!</p>
					<p class="i2">(For they themselves will be but of the least:</p>
					<p>Even worlds miscarry, when too oft they pup,</p>
					<p class="i2">And every new creation hath decreased</p>
					<p>In size, from overworking the material—</p>
					<p>Men are but maggots of some huge Earth's burial.)</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p><i>How</i> will—to these young people, just thrust out</p>
					<p class="i2">From some fresh Paradise, and set to plough,</p>
					<p>And dig, and sweat, and turn themselves about,</p>
					<p class="i2">And plant, and reap, and spin, and grind, and sow,</p>
					<p>Till all the arts at length are brought about,</p>
					<p class="i2">Especially of War and taxing,—<i>how</i>,</p>
					<p>I say, will these great relics, when they see 'em,</p>
					<p>Look like the monsters of a new Museum!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But I am apt to grow too metaphysical:</p>
					<p class="i2">"The time is out of joint,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_504">[504]</a>—and so am I;</p>
					<p>I quite forget this poem's merely quizzical,</p>
					<p class="i2">And deviate into matters rather dry.</p>
					<p>I ne'er decide what I shall say, and this I call<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JE">[JE]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Much too poetical: men should know why</p>
					<p>They write, and for what end; but, note or text,</p>
					<p>I never know the word which will come next.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>So on I ramble, now and then narrating,</p>
					<p class="i2">Now pondering:—it is time we should narrate.</p>
					<p>I left Don Juan with his horses baiting—</p>
					<p class="i2">Now we'll get o'er the ground at a great rate:</p>
					<p>I shall not be particular in stating</p>
					<p class="i2">His journey, we've so many tours of late:</p>
					<p>Suppose him then at Petersburgh; suppose</p>
					<p>That pleasant capital of painted snows;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_505">[505]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suppose him in a handsome uniform—</p>
					<p class="i2">A scarlet coat, black facings, a long plume,</p>
					<p>Waving, like sails new shivered in a storm,</p>
					<p class="i2">Over a cocked hat in a crowded room,</p>
					<p>And brilliant breeches, bright as a Cairn Gorme,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of yellow casimire we may presume,</p>
					<p>White stockings drawn uncurdled as new milk</p>
					<p>O'er limbs whose symmetry set off the silk;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JF">[JF]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suppose him sword by side, and hat in hand,</p>
					<p class="i2">Made up by Youth, Fame, and an army tailor—</p>
					<p>That great enchanter, at whose rod's command</p>
					<p class="i2">Beauty springs forth, and Nature's self turns paler,</p>
					<p>Seeing how Art can make her work more grand</p>
					<p class="i2">(When she don't pin men's limbs in like a gaoler),—</p>
					<p>Behold him placed as if upon a pillar! He<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JG">[JG]</a></p>
					<p>Seems Love turned a Lieutenant of Artillery!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_506">[506]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His bandage slipped down into a cravat—</p>
					<p class="i2">His wings subdued to epaulettes—his quiver</p>
					<p>Shrunk to a scabbard, with his arrows at</p>
					<p class="i2">His side as a small sword, but sharp as ever—</p>
					<p>His bow converted into a cocked hat—</p>
					<p class="i2">But still so like, that Psyche were more clever</p>
					<p>Than some wives (who make blunders no less stupid),</p>
					<p>If she had not mistaken him for Cupid.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The courtiers stared, the ladies whispered, and</p>
					<p class="i2">The Empress smiled: the reigning favourite frowned—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JH">[JH]</a></p>
					<p>I quite forget which of them was in hand</p>
					<p class="i2">Just then, as they are rather numerous found,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_507">[507]</a></p>
					<p>Who took, by turns, that difficult command</p>
					<p class="i2">Since first her Majesty was singly crowned:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_508">[508]</a></p>
					<p>But they were mostly nervous six-foot fellows,</p>
					<p>All fit to make a Patagonian jealous.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan was none of these, but slight and slim,</p>
					<p class="i2">Blushing and beardless; and, yet, ne'ertheless,</p>
					<p>There was a something in his turn of limb,</p>
					<p class="i2">And still more in his eye, which seemed to express,</p>
					<p>That, though he looked one of the Seraphim,</p>
					<p class="i2">There lurked a man beneath the Spirit's dress.</p>
					<p>Besides, the Empress sometimes liked a boy,</p>
					<p>And had just buried the fair-faced Lanskoi.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JI">[JI]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_509">[509]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No wonder then that Yermoloff, or Momonoff,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_510">[510]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Or Scherbatoff, or any other <i>off</i></p>
					<p>Or <i>on</i>, might dread her Majesty had not room enough</p>
					<p class="i2">Within her bosom (which was not too tough),</p>
					<p>For a new flame; a thought to cast of gloom enough</p>
					<p class="i2">Along the aspect, whether smooth or rough,</p>
					<p>Of him who, in the language of his station,</p>
					<p>Then held that "high official situation."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>O gentle ladies! should you seek to know</p>
					<p class="i2">The import of this diplomatic phrase,</p>
					<p>Bid Ireland's Londonderry's Marquess<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_511">[511]</a> show</p>
					<p class="i2">His parts of speech, and in the strange displays</p>
					<p>Of that odd string of words, all in a row,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which none divine, and every one obeys,</p>
					<p>Perhaps you may pick out some queer <i>no</i> meaning,—</p>
					<p>Of that weak wordy harvest the sole gleaning.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I think I can explain myself without</p>
					<p class="i2">That sad inexplicable beast of prey—</p>
					<p>That Sphinx, whose words would ever be a doubt,</p>
					<p class="i2">Did not his deeds unriddle them each day—</p>
					<p>That monstrous hieroglyphic—that long spout</p>
					<p class="i2">Of blood and water—leaden Castlereagh!</p>
					<p>And here I must an anecdote relate,</p>
					<p>But luckily of no great length or weight.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>An English lady asked of an Italian,</p>
					<p class="i2">What were the actual and official duties</p>
					<p>Of the strange thing some women set a value on,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which hovers oft about some married beauties,</p>
					<p>Called "Cavalier Servente?"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_512">[512]</a>—a Pygmalion</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose statues warm (I fear, alas! too true 't is)</p>
					<p>Beneath his art:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JJ">[JJ]</a>—the dame, pressed to disclose them,</p>
					<p>Said—"Lady, I beseech you to <i>suppose them</i>."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And thus I supplicate your supposition,</p>
					<p class="i2">And mildest, matron-like interpretation,</p>
					<p>Of the imperial favourite's condition.</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was a high place, the highest in the nation</p>
					<p>In fact, if not in rank; and the suspicion</p>
					<p class="i2">Of any one's attaining to his station,</p>
					<p>No doubt gave pain, where each new pair of shoulders,</p>
					<p>If rather broad, made stocks rise—and their holders.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan, I said, was a most beauteous boy,</p>
					<p class="i2">And had retained his boyish look beyond</p>
					<p>The usual hirsute seasons which destroy,</p>
					<p class="i2">With beards and whiskers, and the like, the fond</p>
					<p><i>Parisian</i> aspect, which upset old Troy</p>
					<p class="i2">And founded Doctors' Commons:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JK">[JK]</a>—I have conned</p>
					<p>The history of divorces, which, though chequered,</p>
					<p>Calls Ilion's the first damages on record.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Catherine, who loved all things (save her Lord,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who was gone to his place), and passed for much,</p>
					<p>Admiring those (by dainty dames abhorred)</p>
					<p class="i2">Gigantic gentlemen, yet had a touch</p>
					<p>Of sentiment: and he she most adored</p>
					<p class="i2">Was the lamented Lanskoi, who was such</p>
					<p>A lover as had cost her many a tear,</p>
					<p>And yet but made a middling grenadier.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh thou "<i>teterrima causa</i>" of all "<i>belli</i>"—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_513">[513]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Thou gate of Life and Death—thou nondescript!</p>
					<p>Whence is our exit and our entrance,—well I</p>
					<p class="i2">May pause in pondering how all souls are dipped</p>
					<p>In thy perennial fountain:—how man <i>fell</i> I</p>
					<p class="i2">Know not, since Knowledge saw her branches stripped</p>
					<p>Of her first fruit; but how he <i>falls</i> and rises</p>
					<p>Since,—<i>thou</i> hast settled beyond all surmises.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some call thee "the <i>worst</i> cause of War," but I</p>
					<p class="i2">Maintain thou art the <i>best</i>:—for after all,</p>
					<p>From thee we come, to thee we go, and why</p>
					<p class="i2">To get at thee not batter down a wall,</p>
					<p>Or waste a World? since no one can deny</p>
					<p class="i2">Thou dost replenish worlds both great and small:</p>
					<p>With—or without thee—all things at a stand<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JL">[JL]</a></p>
					<p>Are, or would be, thou sea of Life's dry land!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JM">[JM]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Catherine, who was the grand Epitome</p>
					<p class="i2">Of that great cause of War, or Peace, or what</p>
					<p>You please (it causes all the things which be,</p>
					<p class="i2">So you may take your choice of this or that)—</p>
					<p>Catherine, I say, was very glad to see</p>
					<p class="i2">The handsome herald, on whose plumage sat<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_514">[514]</a></p>
					<p>Victory; and, pausing as she saw him kneel</p>
					<p>With his despatch, forgot to break the seal.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then recollecting the whole Empress, nor</p>
					<p class="i2">Forgetting quite the Woman (which composed</p>
					<p>At least three parts of this great whole), she tore</p>
					<p class="i2">The letter open with an air which posed</p>
					<p>The Court, that watched each look her visage wore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until a royal smile at length disclosed</p>
					<p>Fair weather for the day. Though rather spacious,</p>
					<p>Her face was noble, her eyes fine, mouth gracious.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_515">[515]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Great joy was hers, or rather joys: the first</p>
					<p class="i2">Was a ta'en city, thirty thousand slain:</p>
					<p>Glory and triumph o'er her aspect burst,</p>
					<p class="i2">As an East Indian sunrise on the main:—</p>
					<p>These quenched a moment her Ambition's thirst—</p>
					<p class="i2">So Arab deserts drink in Summer's rain:</p>
					<p>In vain!—As fall the dews on quenchless sands,</p>
					<p>Blood only serves to wash Ambition's hands!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her next amusement was more fanciful;</p>
					<p class="i2">She smiled at mad Suwarrow's rhymes, who threw</p>
					<p>Into a Russian couplet rather dull</p>
					<p class="i2">The whole gazette of thousands whom he slew:</p>
					<p>Her third was feminine enough to annul</p>
					<p class="i2">The shudder which runs naturally through</p>
					<p>Our veins, when things called Sovereigns think it best</p>
					<p>To kill, and Generals turn it into jest.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The two first feelings ran their course complete,</p>
					<p class="i2">And lighted first her eye, and then her mouth:</p>
					<p>The whole court looked immediately most sweet,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like flowers well watered after a long drouth:—</p>
					<p>But when on the Lieutenant at her feet</p>
					<p class="i2">Her Majesty, who liked to gaze on youth</p>
					<p>Almost as much as on a new despatch,</p>
					<p>Glanced mildly,—all the world was on the watch.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Though somewhat large, exuberant, and truculent,</p>
					<p class="i2">When <i>wroth</i>—while <i>pleased</i>, she was as fine a figure</p>
					<p>As those who like things rosy, ripe, and succulent,</p>
					<p class="i2">Would wish to look on, while they are in vigour.</p>
					<p>She could repay each amatory look you lent</p>
					<p class="i2">With interest, and, in turn, was wont with rigour</p>
					<p>To exact of Cupid's bills the full amount</p>
					<p>At sight, nor would permit you to discount.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With her the latter, though at times convenient,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was not so necessary; for they tell</p>
					<p>That she was handsome, and though fierce <i>looked</i> lenient,</p>
					<p class="i2">And always used her favourites too well.</p>
					<p>If once beyond her boudoir's precincts in ye went,</p>
					<p class="i2">Your "fortune" was in a fair way "to swell</p>
					<p>A man" (as Giles says);<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_516">[516]</a> for though she would widow all</p>
					<p>Nations, she liked Man as an individual.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What a strange thing is Man! and what a stranger</p>
					<p class="i2">Is Woman! What a whirlwind is her head,</p>
					<p>And what a whirlpool full of depth and danger</p>
					<p class="i2">Is all the rest about her! Whether wed,</p>
					<p>Or widow—maid—or mother, she can change her</p>
					<p class="i2">Mind like the wind: whatever she has said</p>
					<p>Or done, is light to what she'll say or do;—</p>
					<p>The oldest thing on record, and yet new!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh Catherine! (for of all interjections,</p>
					<p class="i2">To thee both <i>oh!</i> and <i>ah!</i> belong, of right,</p>
					<p>In Love and War) how odd are the connections</p>
					<p class="i2">Of human thoughts, which jostle in their flight!</p>
					<p>Just now <i>yours</i> were cut out in different sections:</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>First</i> Ismail's capture caught your fancy quite;</p>
					<p><i>Next</i> of new knights, the fresh and glorious batch:</p>
					<p>And <i>thirdly</i> he who brought you the despatch!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Shakespeare talks of "the herald Mercury</p>
					<p class="i2">New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_517">[517]</a></p>
					<p>And some such visions crossed her Majesty,</p>
					<p class="i2">While her young herald knelt before her still.</p>
					<p>'T is very true the hill seemed rather high,</p>
					<p class="i2">For a Lieutenant to climb up; but skill</p>
					<p>Smoothed even the Simplon's steep, and by God's blessing,</p>
					<p>With Youth and Health all kisses are "Heaven-kissing."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her Majesty looked down, the youth looked up—</p>
					<p class="i2">And so they fell in love;—she with his face,</p>
					<p>His grace, his God-knows-what: for Cupid's cup</p>
					<p class="i2">With the first draught intoxicates apace,</p>
					<p>A quintessential laudanum or "Black Drop,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes one drunk at once, without the base</p>
					<p>Expedient of full bumpers; for the eye</p>
					<p>In love drinks all Life's fountains (save tears) dry.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He, on the other hand, if not in love,</p>
					<p class="i2">Fell into that no less imperious passion,</p>
					<p>Self-love—which, when some sort of thing above</p>
					<p class="i2">Ourselves, a singer, dancer, much in fashion,</p>
					<p>Or Duchess—Princess—Empress, "deigns to prove"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_518">[518]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">('T is Pope's phrase) a great longing, though a rash one,</p>
					<p>For one especial person out of many,</p>
					<p>Make us believe ourselves as good as any.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Besides, he was of that delighted age</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes all female ages equal—when</p>
					<p>We don't much care with whom we may engage,</p>
					<p class="i2">As bold as Daniel in the lions' den,</p>
					<p>So that we can our native sun assuage</p>
					<p class="i2">In the next ocean, which may flow just then—</p>
					<p>To make a <i>twilight</i> in, just as Sol's heat is</p>
					<p>Quenched in the lap of the salt sea, or Thetis.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Catherine (we must say thus much for Catherine),</p>
					<p class="i2">Though bold and bloody, was the kind of thing</p>
					<p>Whose temporary passion was quite flattering,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because each lover looked a sort of King,</p>
					<p>Made up upon an amatory pattern,</p>
					<p class="i2">A royal husband in all save the <i>ring</i>—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JN">[JN]</a></p>
					<p>Which, (being the damnedest part of matrimony,)</p>
					<p>Seemed taking out the sting to leave the honey:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And when you add to this, her Womanhood</p>
					<p class="i2">In its meridian, her blue eyes<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_519">[519]</a> or gray—</p>
					<p>(The last, if they have soul, are quite as good,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or better, as the best examples say:</p>
					<p>Napoleon's, Mary's<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_520">[520]</a> (Queen of Scotland), should</p>
					<p class="i2">Lend to that colour a transcendent ray;</p>
					<p>And Pallas also sanctions the same hue,</p>
					<p>Too wise to look through optics black or blue)—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her sweet smile, and her then majestic figure,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JO">[JO]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Her plumpness, her imperial condescension,</p>
					<p>Her preference of a boy to men much bigger</p>
					<p class="i2">(Fellows whom Messalina's self would pension),</p>
					<p>Her prime of life, just now in juicy vigour,</p>
					<p class="i2">With other <i>extras</i>, which we need not mention,—</p>
					<p>All these, or any one of these, explain</p>
					<p>Enough to make a stripling very vain.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And that's enough, for Love is vanity,</p>
					<p class="i2">Selfish in its beginning as its end,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JP">[JP]</a></p>
					<p>Except where 't is a mere insanity,</p>
					<p class="i2">A maddening spirit which would strive to blend</p>
					<p>Itself with Beauty's frail inanity,</p>
					<p class="i2">On which the Passion's self seems to depend;</p>
					<p>And hence some heathenish philosophers</p>
					<p>Make Love the main-spring of the Universe.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Besides Platonic love, besides the love</p>
					<p class="i2">Of God, the love of sentiment, the</p>
					<p>loving Of faithful pairs—(I needs must rhyme with dove,</p>
					<p class="i2">That good old steam-boat which keeps verses moving</p>
					<p>'Gainst reason—Reason ne'er was hand-and-glove</p>
					<p class="i2">With rhyme, but always leant less to improving</p>
					<p>The sound than sense)—besides all these pretences</p>
					<p>To Love, there are those things which words name senses;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Those movements, those improvements in our bodies</p>
					<p class="i2">Which make all bodies anxious to get out</p>
					<p>Of their own sand-pits, to mix with a goddess,</p>
					<p class="i2">For such all women are at first no doubt.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JQ">[JQ]</a></p>
					<p>How beautiful that moment! and how odd is</p>
					<p class="i2">That fever which precedes the languid rout</p>
					<p>Of our sensations! What a curious way</p>
					<p>The whole thing is of clothing souls in clay!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JR">[JR]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_521">[521]</a></h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The noblest kind of love is love Platonical,</p>
					<p class="i2">To end or to begin with; the next grand</p>
					<p>Is that which may be christened love canonical,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because the clergy take the thing in hand;</p>
					<p>The third sort to be noted in our chronicle</p>
					<p class="i2">As flourishing in every Christian land,</p>
					<p>Is when chaste matrons to their other ties</p>
					<p>Add what may be called <i>marriage in disguise</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Well, we won't analyse—our story must</p>
					<p class="i2">Tell for itself: the Sovereign was smitten,</p>
					<p>Juan much flattered by her love, or lust;—</p>
					<p class="i2">I cannot stop to alter words once written,</p>
					<p>And the <i>two</i> are so mixed with human dust,</p>
					<p class="i2">That he who <i>names one</i>, both perchance may hit on:</p>
					<p>But in such matters Russia's mighty Empress</p>
					<p>Behaved no better than a common sempstress.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The whole court melted into one wide whisper,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all lips were applied unto all ears!</p>
					<p>The elder ladies' wrinkles curled much crisper</p>
					<p class="i2">As they beheld; the younger cast some leers</p>
					<p>On one another, and each lovely lisper</p>
					<p class="i2">Smiled as she talked the matter o'er; but tears</p>
					<p>Of rivalship rose in each clouded eye</p>
					<p>Of all the standing army who stood by.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All the ambassadors of all the powers</p>
					<p class="i2">Inquired, Who was this very new young man,</p>
					<p>Who promised to be great in some few hours?</p>
					<p class="i2">Which is full soon (though Life is but a span).</p>
					<p>Already they beheld the silver showers</p>
					<p class="i2">Of rubles rain, as fast as specie can,</p>
					<p>Upon his cabinet, besides the presents</p>
					<p>Of several ribands, and some thousand peasants.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_522">[522]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Catherine was generous,—all such ladies are:</p>
					<p class="i2">Love—that great opener of the heart and all</p>
					<p>The ways that lead there, be they near or far,</p>
					<p class="i2">Above, below, by turnpikes great or small,—</p>
					<p>Love—(though she had a cursed taste for War,</p>
					<p class="i2">And was not the best wife unless we call</p>
					<p>Such Clytemnestra, though perhaps 't is better</p>
					<p>That one should die—than two drag on the fetter)—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Love had made Catherine make each lover's fortune,</p>
					<p class="i2">Unlike our own half-chaste Elizabeth,</p>
					<p>Whose avarice all disbursements did importune,</p>
					<p class="i2">If History, the grand liar, ever saith</p>
					<p>The truth; and though grief her old age might shorten,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because she put a favourite to death,</p>
					<p>Her vile, ambiguous method of flirtation,</p>
					<p>And stinginess, disgrace her sex and station.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But when the levée rose, and all was bustle</p>
					<p class="i2">In the dissolving circle, all the nations'</p>
					<p>Ambassadors began as 't were to hustle</p>
					<p class="i2">Round the young man with their congratulations.</p>
					<p>Also the softer silks were heard to rustle</p>
					<p class="i2">Of gentle dames, among whose recreations</p>
					<p>It is to speculate on handsome faces,</p>
					<p>Especially when such lead to high places.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan, who found himself, he knew not how,</p>
					<p class="i2">A general object of attention, made</p>
					<p>His answers with a very graceful bow,</p>
					<p class="i2">As if born for the ministerial trade.</p>
					<p>Though modest, on his unembarrassed brow</p>
					<p class="i2">Nature had written "Gentleman!" He said</p>
					<p>Little, but to the purpose; and his manner</p>
					<p>Flung hovering graces o'er him like a banner.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>An order from her Majesty consigned</p>
					<p class="i2">Our young Lieutenant to the genial care</p>
					<p>Of those in office: all the world looked kind,</p>
					<p class="i2">(As it will look sometimes with the first stare,</p>
					<p>Which Youth would not act ill to keep in mind,)</p>
					<p class="i2">As also did Miss Protasoff<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_523">[523]</a> then there,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_JS">[JS]</a></p>
					<p>Named from her mystic office "l'Eprouveuse,"</p>
					<p>A term inexplicable to the Muse.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With <i>her</i> then, as in humble duty bound,</p>
					<p class="i2">Juan retired,—and so will I, until</p>
					<p>My Pegasus shall tire of touching ground.</p>
					<p class="i2">We have just lit on a "heaven-kissing hill,"</p>
					<p>So lofty that I feel my brain turn round,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all my fancies whirling like a mill;</p>
					<p>Which is a signal to my nerves and brain,</p>
					<p>To take a quiet ride in some green lane.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_524">[524]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_476"><span class="label">[476]</span></a> {373}[Stanzas i.-viii., which are headed "<i>Don Juan</i>, Canto III., July 10, 1819," are in the handwriting of (?) the Countess Guiccioli. Stanzas ix., x., which were written on the same sheet of paper, are in Byron's handwriting. The original MS. opens with stanza xi., "Death laughs," etc. (See letter to Moore, July 12, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 96.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_477">
							<span class="label">[477]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Faut qu' lord Villain-ton ait tout pris;</p>
							<p>N'y a plus d' argent dans c' gueux de Paris."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">De Béranger, "Complainte d'une de ces Demoiselles a l'Occasion des Affaires du Temps (Février, 1816)," <i>Chansons</i>, 1821, ii. 17.</p>
					<p>Compare a retaliatory epigram which appeared in a contemporary newspaper—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"These French <i>petit-maîtres</i> who the spectacle throng,</p>
							<p>Say of Wellington's dress <i>qu'il fait vilain ton!</i></p>
							<p>But, at Waterloo, Wellington made the French stare</p>
							<p>When their army he dressed <i>à la mode Angleterre!</i>"]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IT"><span class="label">[IT]</span></a> <i>Oh Wellington</i> (<i>or "Vilainton"</i>)——.—[MS. B.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_478"><span class="label">[478]</span></a> Query, <i>Ney?</i>—Printer's Devil. [Michel Ney, Duke of Elchingen, "the bravest of the brave" (see <i>Ode from the French</i>, stanza i. <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 431), born January 10, 1769, was arrested August 5, and shot December 7, 1815.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_479"><span class="label">[479]</span></a> [The story of the attempted assassination (February 11, 1818) of the Duke of Wellington, which is dismissed by Alison in a few words (<i>Hist. of Europe</i> (1815-1852), 1853, i. 577, 578), occupies many pages of the <i>Supplementary Despatches</i> (1865, xii. 271-546). Byron probably drew his own conclusions as to the Kinnaird-Marinet incident, from the <i>Letter to the Duke of Wellington on the Arrest of M. Marinet</i>, by Lord Kinnaird, 1818. The story, which is full of interest, may be briefly recounted. On January 30, 1818, Lord Kinnaird informed Sir George Murray (Chief of the Staff of the Army of Occupation) that a person, whose name he withheld, had revealed to him the existence of a plot to assassinate the Duke of Wellington. At 12.30 a.m., February 11, 1818, the Duke, on returning to his Hotel, was fired at by an unknown person; and then, but not till then, he wrote to urge Lord Clancarty to advise the Prince Regent to take steps to persuade or force Kinnaird to disclose the name of his informant. A Mr. G.W. Chad, of the Consular Service, was empowered to proceed to Brussels, and to seek an interview with Kinnaird. He carried with him, among other documents, a letter from the Duke to Lord Clancarty, dated February 12, 1818. A postscript contained this intimation: "It may be proper to mention to you that the French Government are disposed to go every length in the way of negotiation with the person mentioned by Lord Kinnaird, or others, to discover the plot."</p>
					<p>Kinnaird absolutely declined to give up the name of his informant, but, acting on the strength of the postscript, which had been read but not shown to him, started for Paris with "the great unknown." Some days after their arrival, and while Kinnaird was a guest of the Duke, the man was arrested, and discovered to be one Nicholle or Marinet, who had been appointed <i>receveur</i> under the restored government of Louis XVIII., but during the <i>Cent jours</i> had fled to Belgium, retaining the funds he had amassed during his term of office. Kinnaird regarded this action of the French Government as a breach of faith, and in a "Memorial" to the French Chamber of Peers, and his <i>Letter</i>, maintained that the Duke's postscript implied a promise of a safe conduct for Marinet to and from Paris to Brussels. The Duke, on the other hand, was equally positive (see his letter to Lord Liverpool, May 30, 1818) "that he never intended to have any negotiations with anybody." Kinnaird was a "dog with a bad name." He had been accused (see his <i>Letter to the Earl of Liverpool</i>, 1816, p. 16) of "the promulgation of dangerous opinions," and of intimacy "with persons suspected." The Duke speaks of him as "the friend of Revolutionists"! It is evident that he held the dangerous doctrine that a promise to a rogue <i>is</i> a promise, and that the authorities took a different view of the ethics of the situation. It is clear, too, that the Duke's postscript was ambiguous, but that it did not warrant the assumption that if Marinet went to Paris he should be protected. The air was full of plots. The great Duke despised and was inclined to ignore the pistol or the dagger of the assassin; but he believed that "mischief was afoot," and that "great personages" might or might not be responsible. He was beset by difficulties at every turn, and would have been more than mortal if he had put too favourable a construction on the scruples, or condoned the imprudence of a "friend of Revolutionists."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_480"><span class="label">[480]</span></a> {374}[The reference may be to the Duke of Wellington's intimacy with Lady Frances Wedderburn Webster. Byron had "passed that way" himself (see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 251, note i, 323, etc.), and could hardly attack the Duke on <i>that</i> score.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_481"><span class="label">[481]</span></a> ["Thou art the best o' the cut-throats."</p>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 17.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_482"><span class="label">[482]</span></a> ["I have supped full of horrors."</p>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 5, line 13.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_483"><span class="label">[483]</span></a> <i>Vide</i> speeches in Parliament, after the battle of Waterloo.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_484"><span class="label">[484]</span></a> {376}["I at this time got a post, being for fatigue, with four others. We were sent to break biscuit, and make a mess for Lord Wellington's hounds. I was very hungry, and thought it a good job at the time, as we got our own fill, while we broke the biscuit,—a thing I had not got for some days. When thus engaged, the Prodigal Son was never once out of my mind; and I sighed, as I fed the dogs, over my humble situation and my ruined hopes."—<i>Journal of a Soldier of the 71st Regiment</i>, 1806 to 1815 (Edinburgh, 1822), pp. 132, 133.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_485"><span class="label">[485]</span></a> ["We are assured that Epaminondas died so poor that the Thebans buried him at the public charge; for at his death nothing was found in his house but an iron spit."—Plutarch's <i>Fabius Maximus</i>, Langhorne's translation, 1838, p. 140. See, too, Cornelius Nepos, <i>Epam</i>., cap. iii. "Paupertatem adeo facilè perpessus est, ut de Republica nihil præter gloriam ceperit."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_486"><span class="label">[486]</span></a> [For Pitt's refusal to accept £100,000 from the merchants of London towards the payment of his debts, or £30,000 from the King's Privy Purse, see <i>Pitt</i>, by Lord Rosebery, 1891. p. 231.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IU"><span class="label">[IU]</span></a> {377}<i>To</i> you <i>this</i> one <i>unflattering Muse inscribes</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IV"><span class="label">[IV]</span></a> {378}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>He strips from man his mantle (which is dear</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Though beautiful in youth) his carnal skin</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_487"><span class="label">[487]</span></a> [<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. i, line 56.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_488"><span class="label">[488]</span></a> ["O dura messorum ilia!" etc.-Hor., <i>Epod.</i> iii. 4.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IW"><span class="label">[IW]</span></a> <i>Ye iron guts</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_489"><span class="label">[489]</span></a> {379}["Ce n'est qu'à l'édition de 1635 qu'on voit paraître la devise que Montaigne avait adoptée, le <i>que sais-je</i>? avec l'emblème des balances. ... Ce <i>que sais-je</i> que Pascal a si sévèrement analysé se lit au chapitre douze du livre ii; il caractérise parfaitement la philosophie de Montaigne; il est la conséquence de cette maxime qu'il avait inscrite en grec sur les solives de sa librairie: 'Il n'est point de raisonnement au quel on n'oppose un raissonnement contraire.'"—<i>Oeuvres de ... Montaigne</i>, 1837, "Notice Bibliographique," p. xvii.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_490"><span class="label">[490]</span></a> [Concerning the Pyrrhonists or Sceptics and their master Pyrrho, who held that Truth was incomprehensible (<i>inprensibilis</i>), and that you may not affirm of aught that it be rather this or that, or neither this nor that (<span title="ou) ma~llon ou(/tôs e)/chei to/de">οὐ μᾶλλον οὕτως ἔχει τόδε</span> <span title="ê)\ e)kei/nôs ê)\ ou)dete/rôs">ἢ ἐκείνως ἢ οὐδετέρως</span>), see Aul. Gellii <i>Noct. Attic.</i>, lib. xi. cap. v.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_491"><span class="label">[491]</span></a> See <i>Othello</i>, [act ii. sc. 3, lines 206, 207: "Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be saved; and there be souls must not be saved—Let's have no more of this."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_492"><span class="label">[492]</span></a> {380}[<i>Hamlet</i>, act v. sc. 2, lines 94, 98, 102.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_493"><span class="label">[493]</span></a> [For "Lycanthropy," see "The Soldier's Story" in the <i>Satyricôn</i> of Petronius Arbiter, cap. 62; see, too, <i>Letters on Demonology, etc.</i>, by Sir W. Scott, 1830, pp. 211, 212.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_494"><span class="label">[494]</span></a> [In respect of suavity and forbearance Melancthon was the counterpart of Luther. John Arrowsmith (1602-1657), in his <i>Tractica Sacra</i>, describes him as "Vir in quo cum pietate doctrina, et cum utrâque candor certavit."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IX">
							<span class="label">[IX]</span>
						</a>
						<i>Like Moses or like Cobbett who have ne'er.</i>
					</p>
					<p>Moses and Cobbet proclaim themselves the "meekest of men." See their writings.—[MS.]</p>
					<p><i>Like Moses who was "very meek" had ne'er</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_495"><span class="label">[495]</span></a> {381}[See his "Correspondance avec L'Impératrice de Russie," <i>Oeuvres Complètes</i> de Voltaire, 1836, x. 393-477. M. Waliszewski, in his <i>Story of a Throne</i>, 1895, i. 224, has gathered a handful of these flowers of speech: "She is the chief person in the world.... She is the fire and life of nations.... She is a saint.... She is above all saints.... She is equal to the mother of God.... She is the divinity of the North.—<i>Te Catherinam laudamus, te Dominam confitemur, etc., etc.</i>"]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IY"><span class="label">[IY]</span></a> <i>Of everything that ever cursed a nation.</i>—[<i>MS. erased.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_496"><span class="label">[496]</span></a> ["It is still more difficult to say which form of government is the <i>worst</i>—all are so bad. As for democracy, it is the worst of the whole; for what is (<i>in fact</i>) democracy?—an Aristocracy of Blackguards."—See "My Dictionary" (May 1, 1821), <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 405, 406.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_IZ"><span class="label">[IZ]</span></a> {382}<i>Though priests and slaves may join the servile cry</i>.—[<i>MS. erased.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_497"><span class="label">[497]</span></a> In Greece I never saw or heard these animals; but among the ruins of Ephesus I have heard them by hundreds.</p>
					<p>[See <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza cliii. line 6, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 441; and <i>Siege of Corinth</i>, line 329, ibid., 1900, iii. 462, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JA"><span class="label">[JA]</span></a> <i>Whereas the others hunt for rascal spiders.</i>—[<i>MS. erased.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JB"><span class="label">[JB]</span></a> <i>Which still are strongly fluttering to be free</i>.—[<i>MS. erased.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_498"><span class="label">[498]</span></a> {383}[Compare <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 576, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 570.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_499"><span class="label">[499]</span></a> {384}[Nadir Shah, or Thamas Kouli Khan, born November, 1688, invaded India, 1739-40, was assassinated June 19, 1747.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JC">
							<span class="label">[JC]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>—— <i>went mad and was</i></p>
							<p><i>Killed because what he swallowed would not pass</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_500"><span class="label">[500]</span></a> He was killed in a conspiracy, after his temper had been exasperated by his extreme costivity to a degree of insanity.</p>
					<p>[To such a height had his madness (attributed to <i>melancholia</i> produced by dropsy) attained, that he actually ordered the Afghan chiefs to rise suddenly upon the Persian guard, and seize the ... chief nobles; but the project being discovered, the intended victims conspired in turn, and a body of them, including Nadir's guard, and the chief of his own tribe of Afshar, entered his tent at midnight, and, after a moment's involuntary pause—when challenged by the deep voice at which they had so often trembled—rushed upon the king, who being brought to the ground by a sabre-stroke, begged for life, and attempted to rise, but soon expired beneath the repeated blows of the conspirators.—<i>The Indian Empire</i>, by R. Montgomery Martin (1857), i. 172.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_501"><span class="label">[501]</span></a> [Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. stanza lxvii. line 5, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 64, note 3.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JD"><span class="label">[JD]</span></a> {385}<i>Or the substrata</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_502"><span class="label">[502]</span></a> [Compare Preface to <i>Cain</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, V. 210, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_503"><span class="label">[503]</span></a> [<i>Vide ante,</i> <a class="pginternal" href="#c8scxxvi">Canto VIII. stanza cxxvi</a>. line 9, p. 368.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_504"><span class="label">[504]</span></a> {386}[<i>Hamlet</i>, act i. sc. 5, line 189.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JE"><span class="label">[JE]</span></a> <i>I never know what's next to come</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_505"><span class="label">[505]</span></a> [It is possible that the phrase "painted snows" was suggested by Tooke's description of the winter-garden of the Taurida Palace: "The genial warmth, ... the voluptuous silence that reigns in this enchanting garden, lull the fancy into sweet romantic dreams: we think ourselves in the groves of Italy, while torpid nature, through the windows of this pavilion, announces the severity of a northern winter" (<i>The Life, etc.</i>, 1800, iii. 48).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JF"><span class="label">[JF]</span></a> {387}<i>O'er limits which mightily</i>——:—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JG"><span class="label">[JG]</span></a>—— <i>in Youth and Glory's pillory</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_506"><span class="label">[506]</span></a> [In his <i>Notes sur le Don Juanisme</i> (<i>Mercure de France</i>, 1898, xxvi. 66), M. Bruchard says that this phrase defines and summarizes the Byronic Don Juan.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JH">
							<span class="label">[JH]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2"><i>The Empress smiled while all the Orloff frowned</i>—</p>
							<p>
								<i>A numerous family, to whose heart or hand</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Mild Catherine owed the chance of being crowned,</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_507"><span class="label">[507]</span></a> {388}[C.F.P. Masson, in his <i>Mémoires Secrets, etc.</i>, 1880, i. 150-178, gives a list of twelve favourites, and in this Canto, Don Juan takes upon himself the characteristics of at least three, Lanskoï, Zoritch (or Zovitch), and Plato Zoubof. For example (p. 167), "Zoritch ... est le seul étranger qu'elle ait osé créer son favori pendant son regne. C'étoit un <i>Servien</i> échappé du bagne de Constantinople où il étoit prisonnier: il parut, pour la première fois, en habit de hussard à la cour. Il éblouit tout le monde par sa beauté, et les vielles dames en parlent encore comme d'un Adonis." M. Waliszewski, in his <i>Romance of an Empress</i> (1894), devotes a chapter to "Private Life and Favouritism" (ii. 234-286), in which he graphically describes the election and inauguration of the <i>Vremienchtchik</i>, "the man of the moment," paramour regnant, and consort of the Empress <i>pro hac vice</i>: "'We may observe in Russia a sort of interregnum in affairs, caused by the displacement of one favourite and the installation of his successor.' ... The interregnums are, however, of very short duration. Only one lasts for several months, between the death of Lanskoï (1784) and the succession of Iermolof.... There is no lack of candidates. The place is good.... Sometimes, too, on the height by the throne, reached at a bound, these spoilt children of fate grow giddy.... It is over in an instant, at an evening reception it is noticed that the Empress has gazed attentively at some obscure lieutenant, presented but just before ... next day it is reported that he has been appointed aide-de-camp to her Majesty. What that means is well known. Next day he finds himself in the special suite of rooms.... The rooms are already vacated, and everything is prepared for the new-comer. All imaginable comfort and luxury ... await him; and, on opening a drawer, he finds a hundred thousand roubles [about £20,000], the usual first gift, a foretaste of Pactolus. That evening, before the assembled court, the Empress appears, leaning familiarly on his arm, and on the stroke of ten, as she retires, the new favourite follows her" (<i>ibid.</i>, pp. 246-249).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_508"><span class="label">[508]</span></a> [After the death or murder of her husband, Peter III., Catherine Alexievna (1729-1796) (born Sophia Augusta), daughter of the Prince of Anhalt Zerbst, was solemnly crowned (September, 1762) Empress of all the Russias.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JI"><span class="label">[JI]</span></a> {389}<i>And almost died for the scarce-fledged Lanskoi</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_509"><span class="label">[509]</span></a> He was the grande passion of the grande Catherine. See her Lives under the head of "Lanskoi."</p>
					<p>[Lanskoi was a youth of as fine and interesting a figure as the imagination can paint. Of all Catherine's favourites, he was the man whom she loved the most. In 1784 he was attacked with a fever, and perished in the arms of her Majesty. When he was no more, Catherine gave herself up to the most poignant grief, and remained three months without going out of her palace of Tzarsko-selo. She afterwards raised a superb monument to his memory. (See <i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, 1800, iii. 88, 89.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_510"><span class="label">[510]</span></a> [Ten months after the death of Lanskoi, the Empress consoled herself with Iermolof, described, by Bezborodky, as "a modest refined young man, who cultivates the society of serious people." In less than a year this excellent youth is, in turn, displaced by Dmitrief Mamonof. His <i>petit nom</i> was <i>Red Coat</i>, and, for a time, he is a "priceless creature." "He has," says Catherine, "two superb black eyes, with eyebrows outlined as one rarely sees; about the middle height, noble in manner, easy in demeanour." But Mamonof suffered from "scruples of conscience," and, after a while, with Catherine's consent and blessing, was happily married to the Princess Shtcherbatof, a maid of honour, and not, as Byron supposed, a rival "man of the moment."—See <i>The Story of a Throne</i>, by K. Waliszewski, 1895, ii. 135, sq.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_511"><span class="label">[511]</span></a> This was written long before the suicide of that person. [For "his parts of speech" compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i16">" ... that long mandarin</p>
							<p>C-stle-r-agh (whom Fum calls the Confucius of Prose)</p>
							<p>Was rehearsing a speech upon Europe's repose</p>
							<p>To the deep double bass of the fat Idol's nose."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Moore's <i>Fum and Hum, The Two Birds of Royalty</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_512"><span class="label">[512]</span></a> {390}[Compare <i>Beppo</i>, stanza xvii. line 8, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 165. See, too, letter to Hoppner, December 31, 1819, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 393.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JJ">
							<span class="label">[JJ]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i4"><i>Beneath his chisel</i>—</p>
							<p>or, <i>Beneath his touches</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JK"><span class="label">[JK]</span></a> {391}—— <i>and bound fair Helen in a bond</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_513"><span class="label">[513]</span></a> Hor., <i>Sat.</i>, lib. i. sat. iii. lines 107, 108.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JL"><span class="label">[JL]</span></a> <i>That Riddle which all read, none understand</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JM"><span class="label">[JM]</span></a>—— <i>thou Sea which lavest Life's sand</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_514"><span class="label">[514]</span></a> {392}["Fortune and victory sit on thy helm."—<i>Richard III.</i>, act v, sc. 3, line 79.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_515"><span class="label">[515]</span></a> ["Catherine had been handsome in her youth, and she preserved a gracefulness and majesty to the last period of her life. She was of a moderate stature, but well proportioned; and as she carried her head very high, she appeared rather tall. She had an open front, an aquiline nose, an agreeable mouth, and her chin, though long, was not mis-shapen. Her hair was auburn, her eyebrows black and rather thick, and her blue eyes had a gentleness which was often affected, but oftener still a mixture of pride. Her physiognomy was not deficient in expression; but this expression never discovered what was passing in the soul of Catherine, or rather it served her the better to disguise it."—<i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, iii. 381 (translated from <i>Vie de Catherine II.</i> (J.H. Castéra), 1797, ii. 450).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_516"><span class="label">[516]</span></a> {393}["His fortune swells him: 'Tis rank, he's married."—<i>Sir Giles Overreach</i>, in Massinger's <i>New Way to pay Old Debts</i>, act v. sc. 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_517"><span class="label">[517]</span></a> {394}[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. iv. lines 58, 59.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_518"><span class="label">[518]</span></a> {395}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>["Not Cæsar's empress would I deign to prove;</p>
							<p class="i2">No! make me mistress to the man I love."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Pope, <i>Eloisa to Abelard</i>, lines 87, 88.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JN">
							<span class="label">[JN]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>O'er whom an Empress her Crown-jewels scattering</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Was wed with something better than a ring</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_519"><span class="label">[519]</span></a> ["Several persons who lived at the court affirm that Catherine had very blue eyes, and not brown, as M. Rulhières has stated."—<i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, 1800, iii. 382.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_520"><span class="label">[520]</span></a> {396}[The historic Catherine (<i>æt.</i> 62) was past her meridian in the spring of 1791.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JO"><span class="label">[JO]</span></a> <i>Her figure, and her vigour, and her rigour</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JP"><span class="label">[JP]</span></a> <i>In its sincere beginning, or dull end</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JQ"><span class="label">[JQ]</span></a> {397}<i>For such all women are just</i> then, <i>no doubt</i>.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JR">
							<span class="label">[JR]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Of such sensations, in the drowsy drear</i>
							</p>
							<p>After—<i>which shadows the, say</i>—second <i>year</i>.—[MS.]</p>
							<p>
								<i>Of that sad heavy, drowsy, doubly drear</i>
							</p>
							<p>After, <i>which shadows the first—say, year</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_521"><span class="label">[521]</span></a> [Stanza lxxvi. is not in the MS.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_522"><span class="label">[522]</span></a> {398}A Russian estate is always valued by the number of the slaves upon it.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_523"><span class="label">[523]</span></a> {399}[The "Protassova" (born 1744) was a cousin of the Orlofs. She survived Catherine by many years, and was, writes M. Waliszewski (<i>The Story of a Throne</i>, 1895, ii. 193), "present at the Congress of Vienna, covered with diamonds like a reliquary, and claiming precedence of every one." She is named <i>l'éprouveuse</i> in a note to the <i>Mémoires Secrets</i>, 1800, i. 148.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_JS"><span class="label">[JS]</span></a> <i>And not be dazzled by its early glare</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_524"><span class="label">[524]</span></a> End of Canto 9<sup>th</sup>, Augt. Sept., 1822. B.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
