<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>Canto VII<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_364">[364]</a></h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>O Love! O Glory! what are ye who fly</p>
					<p class="i2">Around us ever, rarely to alight?</p>
					<p>There's not a meteor in the polar sky</p>
					<p class="i2">Of such transcendent and more fleeting flight.</p>
					<p>Chill, and chained to cold earth, we lift on high</p>
					<p class="i2">Our eyes in search of either lovely light;</p>
					<p>A thousand and a thousand colours they</p>
					<p>Assume, then leave us on our freezing way.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And such as they are, such my present tale is,</p>
					<p class="i2">A nondescript and ever-varying rhyme,</p>
					<p>A versified Aurora Borealis,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which flashes o'er a waste and icy clime.</p>
					<p>When we know what all are, we must bewail us,</p>
					<p class="i2">But ne'ertheless I hope it is no crime</p>
					<p>To laugh at <i>all</i> things—for I wish to know</p>
					<p><i>What</i>, after <i>all</i>, are <i>all</i> things—but a <i>show</i>?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They accuse me—<i>Me</i>—the present writer of</p>
					<p class="i2">The present poem—of—I know not what—</p>
					<p>A tendency to under-rate and scoff</p>
					<p class="i2">At human power and virtue, and all that;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_365">[365]</a></p>
					<p>And this they say in language rather rough.</p>
					<p class="i2">Good God! I wonder what they would be at!</p>
					<p>I say no more than hath been said in Danté's</p>
					<p>Verse, and by Solomon and by Cervantes;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>By Swift, by Machiavel, by Rochefoucault,</p>
					<p class="i2">By Fénélon, by Luther, and by Plato;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HH">[HH]</a></p>
					<p>By Tillotson, and Wesley, and Rousseau,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who knew this life was not worth a potato.</p>
					<p>'T is not their fault, nor mine, if this be so,—</p>
					<p class="i2">For my part, I pretend not to be Cato,</p>
					<p>Nor even Diogenes.—We live and die,</p>
					<p>But which is best, <i>you</i> know no more than I.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Socrates said, our only knowledge was<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_366">[366]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">"To know that nothing could be known;" a pleasant</p>
					<p>Science enough, which levels to an ass</p>
					<p class="i2">Each man of wisdom, future, past, or present.</p>
					<p>Newton (that proverb of the mind), alas!</p>
					<p class="i2">Declared, with all his grand discoveries recent,</p>
					<p>That he himself felt only "like a youth</p>
					<p>Picking up shells by the great ocean—Truth."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HI">[HI]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_367">[367]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ecclesiastes said, "that all is vanity"—</p>
					<p class="i2">Most modern preachers say the same, or show it</p>
					<p>By their examples of true Christianity:</p>
					<p class="i2">In short, all know, or very soon may know it;</p>
					<p>And in this scene of all-confessed inanity,</p>
					<p class="i2">By Saint, by Sage, by Preacher, and by Poet,</p>
					<p>Must I restrain me, through the fear of strife,</p>
					<p>From holding up the nothingness of Life?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HJ">[HJ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Dogs, or men!—for I flatter you<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_368">[368]</a> in saying</p>
					<p class="i2">That ye are dogs—your betters far—ye may</p>
					<p>Read, or read not, what I am now essaying</p>
					<p class="i2">To show ye what ye are in every way.</p>
					<p>As little as the moon stops for the baying</p>
					<p class="i2">Of wolves, will the bright Muse withdraw one ray</p>
					<p>From out her skies—then howl your idle wrath!</p>
					<p>While she still silvers o'er your gloomy path.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Fierce loves and faithless wars"—I am not sure</p>
					<p class="i2">If this be the right reading—'t is no matter;</p>
					<p>The fact's about the same, I am secure;</p>
					<p class="i2">I sing them both, and am about to batter</p>
					<p>A town which did a famous siege endure,</p>
					<p class="i2">And was beleaguered both by land and water</p>
					<p>By Souvaroff,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_369">[369]</a> or Anglicè Suwarrow,</p>
					<p>Who loved blood as an alderman loves marrow.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The fortress is called Ismail, and is placed</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon the Danube's left branch and left bank,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_370">[370]</a></p>
					<p>With buildings in the Oriental taste,</p>
					<p class="i2">But still a fortress of the foremost rank,</p>
					<p>Or was at least, unless 't is since defaced,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which with your conquerors is a common prank:</p>
					<p>It stands some eighty versts from the high sea,</p>
					<p>And measures round of toises thousands three.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_371">[371]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Within the extent of this fortification</p>
					<p class="i2">A borough is comprised along the height</p>
					<p>Upon the left, which from its loftier station</p>
					<p class="i2">Commands the city, and upon its site</p>
					<p>A Greek had raised around this elevation</p>
					<p class="i2">A quantity of palisades <i>upright</i>,</p>
					<p>So placed as to <i>impede</i> the fire of those</p>
					<p>Who held the place, and to <i>assist</i> the foe's.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_372">[372]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This circumstance may serve to give a notion</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the high talents of this new Vauban:</p>
					<p>But the town ditch below was deep as Ocean,</p>
					<p class="i2">The rampart higher than you'd wish to hang:</p>
					<p>But then there was a great want of precaution</p>
					<p class="i2">(Prithee, excuse this engineering slang),</p>
					<p>Nor work advanced, nor covered way was there,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_373">[373]</a></p>
					<p>To hint, at least, "Here is no thoroughfare."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But a stone bastion, with a narrow gorge,</p>
					<p class="i2">And walls as thick as most skulls born as yet;</p>
					<p>Two batteries, cap-à-pie, as our St. George,</p>
					<p class="i2">Casemated<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_374">[374]</a> one, and t' other "a barbette,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_375">[375]</a></p>
					<p>Of Danube's bank took formidable charge;</p>
					<p class="i2">While two-and-twenty cannon duly set</p>
					<p>Rose over the town's right side, in bristling tier,</p>
					<p>Forty feet high, upon a cavalier.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_376">[376]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But from the river the town's open quite,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because the Turks could never be persuaded</p>
					<p>A Russian vessel e'er would heave in sight;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_377">[377]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And such their creed was till they were invaded,</p>
					<p>When it grew rather late to set things right:</p>
					<p class="i2">But as the Danube could not well be waded,</p>
					<p>They looked upon the Muscovite flotilla,</p>
					<p>And only shouted, "Allah!" and "Bis Millah!"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Russians now were ready to attack;</p>
					<p class="i2">But oh, ye goddesses of War and Glory!</p>
					<p>How shall I spell the name of each Cossacque</p>
					<p class="i2">Who were immortal, could one tell their story?</p>
					<p>Alas! what to their memory can lack?</p>
					<p class="i2">Achilles' self was not more grim and gory</p>
					<p>Than thousands of this new and polished nation,</p>
					<p>Whose names want nothing but—pronunciation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Still I'll record a few, if but to increase</p>
					<p class="i2">Our euphony: there was Strongenoff, and Strokonoff,</p>
					<p>Meknop, Serge Lwow, Arséniew of modern Greece,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Tschitsshakoff, and Roguenoff, and Chokenoff,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_378">[378]</a></p>
					<p>And others of twelve consonants apiece;</p>
					<p class="i2">And more might be found out, if I could poke enough</p>
					<p>Into gazettes; but Fame (capricious strumpet),</p>
					<p>It seems, has got an ear as well as trumpet,</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And cannot tune those discords of narration,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HK">[HK]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Which may be names at Moscow, into rhyme;</p>
					<p>Yet there were several worth commemoration,</p>
					<p class="i2">As e'er was virgin of a nuptial chime;</p>
					<p>Soft words, too, fitted for the peroration</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Londonderry drawling against time,</p>
					<p>Ending in "ischskin," "ousckin," "iffskchy," "ouski,"</p>
					<p>Of whom we can insert but Rousamouski,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_379">[379]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Scherematoff and Chrematoff, Koklophti,</p>
					<p class="i2">Koclobski, Kourakin, and Mouskin Pouskin,</p>
					<p>All proper men of weapons, as e'er scoffed high<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_380">[380]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Against a foe, or ran a sabre through skin:</p>
					<p>Little cared they for Mahomet or Mufti,</p>
					<p class="i2">Unless to make their kettle-drums a new skin</p>
					<p>Out of their hides, if parchment had grown dear,</p>
					<p>And no more handy substitute been near.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then there were foreigners of much renown,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of various nations, and all volunteers;</p>
					<p>Not fighting for their country or its crown,</p>
					<p class="i2">But wishing to be one day brigadiers;</p>
					<p>Also to have the sacking of a town;—</p>
					<p class="i2">A pleasant thing to young men at their years.</p>
					<p>'Mongst them were several Englishmen of pith,</p>
					<p>Sixteen called Thomson, and nineteen named Smith.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Jack Thomson and Bill Thomson;—all the rest</p>
					<p class="i2">Had been called <i>"Jemmy,"</i> after the great bard;</p>
					<p>I don't know whether they had arms or crest,</p>
					<p class="i2">But such a godfather's as good a card.</p>
					<p>Three of the Smiths were Peters; but the best</p>
					<p class="i2">Amongst them all, hard blows to inflict or ward,</p>
					<p>Was <i>he</i>, since so renowned "in country quarters</p>
					<p>At Halifax;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_381">[381]</a> but now he served the Tartars.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The rest were Jacks and Gills and Wills and Bills,</p>
					<p class="i2">But when I've added that the elder Jack Smith</p>
					<p>Was born in Cumberland among the hills,</p>
					<p class="i2">And that his father was an honest blacksmith,</p>
					<p>I've said all <i>I</i> know of a name that fills</p>
					<p class="i2">Three lines of the despatch in taking "Schmacksmith,"</p>
					<p>A village of Moldavia's waste, wherein</p>
					<p>He fell, immortal in a bulletin.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I wonder (although Mars no doubt's a god I</p>
					<p class="i2">Praise) if a man's name in a <i>bulletin</i></p>
					<p>May make up for a <i>bullet in</i> his body?</p>
					<p class="i2">I hope this little question is no sin,</p>
					<p>Because, though I am but a simple noddy,</p>
					<p class="i2">I think one Shakespeare puts the same thought in</p>
					<p>The mouth of some one in his plays so doting,</p>
					<p>Which many people pass for wits by quoting.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_382">[382]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then there were Frenchmen, gallant, young, and gay;</p>
					<p class="i2">But I'm too great a patriot to record</p>
					<p>Their Gallic names upon a glorious day;</p>
					<p class="i2">I'd rather tell ten lies than say a word</p>
					<p>Of truth;—such truths are treason; they betray</p>
					<p class="i2">Their country; and as traitors are abhorred,</p>
					<p>Who name the French in English, save to show</p>
					<p>How Peace should make John Bull the Frenchman's foe.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Russians, having built two batteries on</p>
					<p class="i2">An isle near Ismail, had two ends in view;</p>
					<p>The first was to bombard it, and knock down</p>
					<p class="i2">The public buildings and the private too,</p>
					<p>No matter what poor souls might be undone:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HL">[HL]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The city's shape suggested this, 't is true,</p>
					<p>Formed like an amphitheatre—each dwelling</p>
					<p>Presented a fine mark to throw a shell in.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_383">[383]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The second object was to profit by</p>
					<p class="i2">The moment of the general consternation,</p>
					<p>To attack the Turk's flotilla, which lay nigh</p>
					<p class="i2">Extremely tranquil, anchored at its station:</p>
					<p>But a third motive was as probably</p>
					<p class="i2">To frighten them into capitulation;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_384">[384]</a></p>
					<p>A phantasy which sometimes seizes warriors,</p>
					<p>Unless they are game as bull-dogs and fox-terriers.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HM">[HM]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A habit rather blameable, which is</p>
					<p class="i2">That of despising those we combat with,</p>
					<p>Common in many cases, was in this</p>
					<p class="i2">The cause<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_385">[385]</a> of killing Tchitchitzkoff and Smith—</p>
					<p>One of the valorous "Smiths" whom we shall miss</p>
					<p class="i2">Out of those nineteen who late rhymed to "pith;"</p>
					<p>But 't is a name so spread o'er "Sir" and "Madam,"</p>
					<p>That one would think the <i>first</i> who bore it <i>"Adam."</i></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Russian batteries were incomplete,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because they were constructed in a hurry;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_386">[386]</a></p>
					<p>Thus the same cause which makes a verse want feet,</p>
					<p class="i2">And throws a cloud o'er Longman and John Murray,</p>
					<p>When the sale of new books is not so fleet</p>
					<p class="i2">As they who print them think is necessary,</p>
					<p>May likewise put off for a time what story</p>
					<p>Sometimes calls "Murder," and at others "Glory."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Whether it was their engineer's stupidity,</p>
					<p class="i2">Their haste or waste, I neither know nor care,</p>
					<p>Or some contractor's personal cupidity,</p>
					<p class="i2">Saving his soul by cheating in the ware</p>
					<p>Of homicide, but there was no solidity</p>
					<p class="i2">In the new batteries erected there;</p>
					<p>They either missed, or they were never missed,</p>
					<p>And added greatly to the missing list.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A sad miscalculation about distance</p>
					<p class="i2">Made all their naval matters incorrect;</p>
					<p>Three fireships lost their amiable existence</p>
					<p class="i2">Before they reached a spot to take effect;</p>
					<p>The match was lit too soon, and no assistance</p>
					<p class="i2">Could remedy this lubberly defect;</p>
					<p>They blew up in the middle of the river,</p>
					<p>While, though 't was dawn, the Turks slept fast as ever.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_387">[387]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At seven they rose, however, and surveyed</p>
					<p class="i2">The Russ flotilla getting under way;</p>
					<p>'T was nine, when still advancing undismayed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Within a cable's length their vessels lay</p>
					<p>Off Ismail, and commenced a cannonade,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which was returned with interest, I may say,</p>
					<p>And by a fire of musketry and grape,</p>
					<p>And shells and shot of every size and shape.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_388">[388]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For six hours bore they without intermission</p>
					<p class="i2">The Turkish fire, and, aided by their own</p>
					<p>Land batteries, worked their guns with great precision;</p>
					<p class="i2">At length they found mere cannonade alone</p>
					<p>By no means would produce the town's submission,</p>
					<p class="i2">And made a signal to retreat at one.</p>
					<p>One bark blew up, a second near the works</p>
					<p>Running aground, was taken by the Turks.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_389">[389]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Moslem, too, had lost both ships and men;</p>
					<p class="i2">But when they saw the enemy retire,</p>
					<p>Their Delhis<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_390">[390]</a> manned some boats, and sailed again,</p>
					<p class="i2">And galled the Russians with a heavy fire,</p>
					<p>And tried to make a landing on the main;</p>
					<p class="i2">But here the effect fell short of their desire:</p>
					<p>Count Damas drove them back into the water</p>
					<p>Pell-mell, and with a whole gazette of slaughter.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_391">[391]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"If" (says the historian here) "I could report</p>
					<p class="i2">All that the Russians did upon this day,</p>
					<p>I think that several volumes would fall short,</p>
					<p class="i2">And I should still have many things to say;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_392">[392]</a></p>
					<p>And so he says no more—but pays his court</p>
					<p class="i2">To some distinguished strangers in that fray;</p>
					<p>The Prince de Ligne, and Langeron, and Damas,</p>
					<p>Names great as any that the roll of Fame has.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_393">[393]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This being the case, may show us what Fame <i>is</i>:</p>
					<p class="i2">For out of these three "<i>preux Chevaliers</i>," how</p>
					<p>Many of common readers give a guess</p>
					<p class="i2">That such existed? (and they may live now</p>
					<p>For aught we know.) Renown's all hit or miss;</p>
					<p class="i2">There's fortune even in Fame, we must allow.</p>
					<p>'T is true, the Memoirs of the Prince de Ligne<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_394">[394]</a></p>
					<p>Have half withdrawn from <i>him</i> Oblivion's screen.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But here are men who fought in gallant actions</p>
					<p class="i2">As gallantly as ever heroes fought,</p>
					<p>But buried in the heap of such transactions</p>
					<p class="i2">Their names are rarely found, nor often sought.</p>
					<p>Thus even good fame may suffer sad contractions,</p>
					<p class="i2">And is extinguished sooner than she ought:</p>
					<p>Of all our modern battles, I will bet</p>
					<p>You can't repeat nine names from each Gazette.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In short, this last attack, though rich in glory,</p>
					<p class="i2">Showed that <i>somewhere, somehow</i>, there was a fault,</p>
					<p>And Admiral Ribas<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_395">[395]</a> (known in Russian story)</p>
					<p class="i2">Most strongly recommended an assault;</p>
					<p>In which he was opposed by young and hoary,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which made a long debate; but I must halt,</p>
					<p>For if I wrote down every warrior's speech,</p>
					<p>I doubt few readers e'er would mount the breach.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There was a man, if that he was a man,</p>
					<p class="i2">Not that his manhood could be called in question,</p>
					<p>For had he not been Hercules, his span</p>
					<p class="i2">Had been as short in youth as indigestion</p>
					<p>Made his last illness, when, all worn and wan,</p>
					<p class="i2">He died beneath a tree, as much unblest on</p>
					<p>The soil of the green province he had wasted,</p>
					<p>As e'er was locust on the land it blasted.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This was Potemkin<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_396">[396]</a>—a great thing in days</p>
					<p class="i2">When homicide and harlotry made great;</p>
					<p>If stars and titles could entail long praise,</p>
					<p class="i2">His glory might half equal his estate.</p>
					<p>This fellow, being six foot high, could raise</p>
					<p class="i2">A kind of phantasy proportionate</p>
					<p>In the then Sovereign of the Russian people,</p>
					<p>Who measured men as you would do a steeple.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>While things were in abeyance, Ribas sent</p>
					<p class="i2">A courier to the Prince, and he succeeded</p>
					<p>In ordering matters after his own bent;</p>
					<p class="i2">I cannot tell the way in which he pleaded,</p>
					<p>But shortly he had cause to be content.</p>
					<p class="i2">In the mean time, the batteries proceeded,</p>
					<p>And fourscore cannon on the Danube's border</p>
					<p>Were briskly fired and answered in due order.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_397">[397]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But on the thirteenth, when already part</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the troops were embarked, the siege to raise,</p>
					<p>A courier on the spur inspired new heart</p>
					<p class="i2">Into all panters for newspaper praise,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HN">[HN]</a></p>
					<p>As well as dilettanti in War's art,</p>
					<p class="i2">By his despatches (couched in pithy phrase)</p>
					<p>Announcing the appointment of that lover of</p>
					<p>Battles to the command, Field-Marshal Souvaroff.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_398">[398]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The letter of the Prince to the same Marshal</p>
					<p class="i2">Was worthy of a Spartan, had the cause</p>
					<p>Been one to which a good heart could be partial—</p>
					<p class="i2">Defence of freedom, country, or of laws;</p>
					<p>But as it was mere lust of Power to o'er-arch all</p>
					<p class="i2">With its proud brow, it merits slight applause,</p>
					<p>Save for its style, which said, all in a trice,</p>
					<p>"You will take Ismail at whatever price."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_399">[399]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Let there be Light! said God, and there was Light!"</p>
					<p class="i2">"Let there be Blood!" says man, and there's a sea!</p>
					<p>The fiat of this spoiled child of the Night</p>
					<p class="i2">(For Day ne'er saw his merits) could decree</p>
					<p>More evil in an hour, than thirty bright</p>
					<p class="i2">Summers could renovate, though they should be</p>
					<p>Lovely as those which ripened Eden's fruit;</p>
					<p>For War cuts up not only branch, but root.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Our friends, the Turks, who with loud "Allahs" now</p>
					<p class="i2">Began to signalise the Russ retreat,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_400">[400]</a></p>
					<p>Were damnably mistaken; few are slow</p>
					<p class="i2">In thinking that their enemy is beat,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_401">[401]</a></p>
					<p>(Or <i>beaten</i>, if you insist on grammar, though</p>
					<p class="i2">I never think about it in a heat,)</p>
					<p>But here I say the Turks were much mistaken,</p>
					<p>Who hating hogs, yet wished to save their bacon.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For, on the sixteenth, at full gallop, drew</p>
					<p class="i2">In sight two horsemen, who were deemed Cossacques</p>
					<p>For some time, till they came in nearer view:</p>
					<p class="i2">They had but little baggage at their backs,</p>
					<p>For there were but <i>three</i> shirts between the two;</p>
					<p class="i2">But on they rode upon two Ukraine hacks,</p>
					<p>Till, in approaching, were at length descried</p>
					<p>In this plain pair, Suwarrow and his guide.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_402">[402]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Great joy to London now!" says some great fool,</p>
					<p class="i2">When London had a grand illumination,</p>
					<p>Which to that bottle-conjuror, John Bull,</p>
					<p class="i2">Is of all dreams the first hallucination;</p>
					<p>So that the streets of coloured lamps are full,</p>
					<p class="i2">That sage (said John) surrenders at discretion<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HO">[HO]</a></p>
					<p>His purse, his soul, his sense, and even his nonsense,</p>
					<p>To gratify, like a huge moth, this <i>one</i> sense.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is strange that he should further "Damn his eyes,"</p>
					<p class="i2">For they are damned; that once all-famous oath</p>
					<p>Is to the Devil now no further prize,</p>
					<p class="i2">Since John has lately lost the use of both.</p>
					<p>Debt he calls Wealth, and taxes Paradise;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Famine, with her gaunt and bony growth,</p>
					<p>Which stare him in the face, he won't examine,</p>
					<p>Or swears that Ceres hath begotten Famine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But to the tale;—great joy unto the camp!</p>
					<p class="i2">To Russian, Tartar, English, French, Cossacque,</p>
					<p>O'er whom Suwarrow shone like a gas lamp,</p>
					<p class="i2">Presaging a most luminous attack;</p>
					<p>Or like a wisp along the marsh so damp,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which leads beholders on a boggy walk,</p>
					<p>He flitted to and fro a dancing light,</p>
					<p>Which all who saw it followed, wrong or right.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But, certes, matters took a different face;</p>
					<p class="i2">There was enthusiasm and much applause,</p>
					<p>The fleet and camp saluted with great grace,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all presaged good fortune to their cause.</p>
					<p>Within a cannot-shot length of the place</p>
					<p class="i2">They drew, constructed ladders, repaired flaws</p>
					<p>In former works, made new, prepared fascines,</p>
					<p>And all kinds of benevolent machines.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is thus the spirit of a single mind</p>
					<p class="i2">Makes that of multitudes take one direction,</p>
					<p>As roll the waters to the breathing wind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or roams the herd beneath the bull's protection;</p>
					<p>Or as a little dog will lead the blind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or a bell-wether form the flock's connection</p>
					<p>By tinkling sounds, when they go forth to victual;</p>
					<p>Such is the sway of your great men o'er little.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The whole camp rung with joy; you would have thought</p>
					<p class="i2">That they were going to a marriage feast</p>
					<p>(This metaphor, I think, holds good as aught,</p>
					<p class="i2">Since there is discord after both at least):</p>
					<p>There was not now a luggage boy but sought</p>
					<p class="i2">Danger and spoil with ardour much increased;</p>
					<p>And why? because a little—odd—old man,</p>
					<p>Stripped to his shirt, was come to lead the van.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But so it was; and every preparation</p>
					<p class="i2">Was made with all alacrity: the first</p>
					<p>Detachment of three columns took its station,</p>
					<p class="i2">And waited but the signal's voice to burst</p>
					<p>Upon the foe: the second's ordination</p>
					<p class="i2">Was also in three columns, with a thirst</p>
					<p>For Glory gaping o'er a sea of Slaughter:</p>
					<p>The third, in columns two, attacked by water.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_403">[403]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>New batteries were erected, and was held</p>
					<p class="i2">A general council, in which Unanimity,</p>
					<p>That stranger to most councils, here prevailed,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_404">[404]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">As sometimes happens in a great extremity;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HP">[HP]</a></p>
					<p>And every difficulty being dispelled,</p>
					<p class="i2">Glory began to dawn with due sublimity,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HQ">[HQ]</a></p>
					<p>While Souvaroff, determined to obtain it,</p>
					<p>Was teaching his recruits to use the bayonet.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_405">[405]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It is an actual fact, that he, commander</p>
					<p class="i2">In chief, in proper person deigned to drill</p>
					<p>The awkward squad, and could afford to squander</p>
					<p class="i2">His time, a corporal's duty to fulfil;</p>
					<p>Just as you'd break a sucking salamander</p>
					<p class="i2">To swallow flame, and never take it ill:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HR">[HR]</a></p>
					<p>He showed them how to mount a ladder (which</p>
					<p>Was not like Jacob's) or to cross a ditch.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_406">[406]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Also he dressed up, for the nonce, fascines</p>
					<p class="i2">Like men with turbans, scimitars, and dirks,</p>
					<p>And made them charge with bayonet these machines,</p>
					<p class="i2">By way of lesson against actual Turks;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_407">[407]</a></p>
					<p>And when well practised in these mimic scenes,</p>
					<p class="i2">He judged them proper to assail the works,—</p>
					<p>(At which your wise men sneered in phrases witty),<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HS">[HS]</a></p>
					<p>He made no answer—but he took the city.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Most things were in this posture on the eve</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the assault, and all the camp was in</p>
					<p>A stern repose; which you would scarce conceive;</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet men resolved to dash through thick and thin</p>
					<p>Are very silent when they once believe</p>
					<p class="i2">That all is settled:—there was little din,</p>
					<p>For some were thinking of their home and friends,</p>
					<p>And others of themselves and latter ends.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HT">[HT]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suwarrow chiefly was on the alert,</p>
					<p class="i2">Surveying, drilling, ordering, jesting, pondering;</p>
					<p>For the man was, we safely may assert,</p>
					<p class="i2">A thing to wonder at beyond most wondering;</p>
					<p>Hero, buffoon, half-demon, and half-dirt,</p>
					<p class="i2">Praying, instructing, desolating, plundering—Now</p>
					<p>Mars, now Momus—and when bent to storm</p>
					<p>A fortress, Harlequin in uniform.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_408">[408]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The day before the assault, while upon drill—</p>
					<p class="i2">For this great conqueror played the corporal—</p>
					<p>Some Cossacques, hovering like hawks round a hill,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had met a party towards the Twilight's fall,</p>
					<p>One of whom spoke their tongue—or well or ill,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was much that he was understood at all;</p>
					<p>But whether from his voice, or speech, or manner,</p>
					<p>They found that he had fought beneath their banner.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Whereon immediately at his request</p>
					<p class="i2">They brought him and his comrades to head-quarters;</p>
					<p>Their dress was Moslem, but you might have guessed</p>
					<p class="i2">That these were merely masquerading Tartars,</p>
					<p>And that beneath each Turkish-fashioned vest</p>
					<p class="i2">Lurked Christianity—which sometimes barters</p>
					<p>Her inward grace for outward show, and makes</p>
					<p>It difficult to shun some strange mistakes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suwarrow, who was standing in his shirt</p>
					<p class="i2">Before a company of Calmucks, drilling,</p>
					<p>Exclaiming, fooling, swearing at the inert,</p>
					<p class="i2">And lecturing on the noble art of killing,—</p>
					<p>For deeming human clay but common dirt</p>
					<p class="i2">This great philosopher was thus instilling</p>
					<p>His maxims,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_409">[409]</a> which to martial comprehension</p>
					<p>Proved death in battle equal to a pension;—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suwarrow, when he saw this company</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Cossacques and their prey, turned round and cast</p>
					<p>Upon them his slow brow and piercing eye:—</p>
					<p class="i2">"Whence come ye?"—"From Constantinople last,</p>
					<p>Captives just now escaped," was the reply.</p>
					<p class="i2">"What are ye?"—"What you see us." Briefly passed</p>
					<p>This dialogue; for he who answered knew</p>
					<p>To whom he spoke, and made his words but few.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Your names?"—"Mine's Johnson, and my comrade's Juan;</p>
					<p class="i2">The other two are women, and the third</p>
					<p>Is neither man nor woman." The Chief threw on</p>
					<p class="i2">The party a slight glance, then said, "I have heard</p>
					<p><i>Your</i> name before, the second is a new one:</p>
					<p class="i2">To bring the other three here was absurd:</p>
					<p>But let that pass:—I think I have heard your name</p>
					<p>In the Nikolaiew regiment?"—"The same."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"You served at Widdin?"—"Yes."—"You led the attack?"</p>
					<p class="i2">"I did."—"What next?"—"I really hardly know"—</p>
					<p>"You were the first i' the breach?"—"I was not slack</p>
					<p class="i2">At least to follow those who might be so"—</p>
					<p>"What followed?"—"A shot laid me on my back,</p>
					<p class="i2">And I became a prisoner to the foe"—</p>
					<p>"You shall have vengeance, for the town surrounded</p>
					<p>Is twice as strong as that where you were wounded.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Where will you serve?"—"Where'er you please."—"I know</p>
					<p class="i2">You like to be the hope of the forlorn,</p>
					<p>And doubtless would be foremost on the foe</p>
					<p class="i2">After the hardships you've already borne.</p>
					<p>And this young fellow—say what can he do?</p>
					<p class="i2">He with the beardless chin and garments torn?"—</p>
					<p>"Why, General, if he hath no greater fault</p>
					<p>In War than Love, he had better lead the assault"—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"He shall if that he dare." Here Juan bowed</p>
					<p class="i2">Low as the compliment deserved. Suwarrow</p>
					<p>Continued: "Your old regiment's allowed,</p>
					<p class="i2">By special providence, to lead to-morrow,</p>
					<p>Or, it may be, to-night, the assault: I have vowed</p>
					<p class="i2">To several Saints, that shortly plough or harrow</p>
					<p>Shall pass o'er what was Ismail, and its tusk<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_410">[410]</a></p>
					<p>Be unimpeded by the proudest mosque.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"So now, my lads, for Glory!"—Here he turned</p>
					<p class="i2">And drilled away in the most classic Russian,</p>
					<p>Until each high heroic bosom burned</p>
					<p class="i2">For cash and conquest, as if from a cushion</p>
					<p>A preacher had held forth (who nobly spurned</p>
					<p class="i2">All earthly goods save tithes) and bade them push on</p>
					<p>To slay the Pagans who resisted, battering</p>
					<p>The armies of the Christian Empress Catherine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Johnson, who knew by this long colloquy</p>
					<p class="i2">Himself a favourite, ventured to address</p>
					<p>Suwarrow, though engaged with accents high</p>
					<p class="i2">In his resumed amusement. "I confess</p>
					<p>My debt in being thus allowed to die</p>
					<p class="i2">Among the foremost; but if you'd express</p>
					<p>Explicitly our several posts, my friend</p>
					<p>And self would know what duty to attend."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Right! I was busy, and forgot. Why, you</p>
					<p class="i2">Will join your former regiment, which should be</p>
					<p>Now under arms. Ho! Katskoff, take him to"—</p>
					<p class="i2">(Here he called up a Polish orderly)</p>
					<p>"His post, I mean the regiment Nikolaiew:</p>
					<p class="i2">The stranger stripling may remain with me;</p>
					<p>He's a fine boy. The women may be sent</p>
					<p>To the other baggage, or to the sick tent."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But here a sort of scene began to ensue:</p>
					<p class="i2">The ladies,—who by no means had been bred</p>
					<p>To be disposed of in a way so new,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although their Harem education led,</p>
					<p>Doubtless, to that of doctrines the most true,</p>
					<p class="i2">Passive obedience,—now raised up the head</p>
					<p>With flashing eyes and starting tears, and flung</p>
					<p>Their arms, as hens their wings about their young,</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>O'er the promoted couple of brave men</p>
					<p class="i2">Who were thus honoured by the greatest Chief</p>
					<p>That ever peopled Hell with heroes slain,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or plunged a province or a realm in grief.</p>
					<p>Oh, foolish mortals! Always taught in vain!</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh, glorious Laurel! since for one sole leaf</p>
					<p>Of thine imaginary deathless tree,</p>
					<p>Of blood and tears must flow the unebbing sea.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HU">[HU]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suwarrow, who had small regard for tears,</p>
					<p class="i2">And not much sympathy for blood, surveyed</p>
					<p>The women with their hair about their ears</p>
					<p class="i2">And natural agonies, with a slight shade</p>
					<p>Of feeling: for however Habit sears</p>
					<p class="i2">Men's hearts against whole millions, when their trade</p>
					<p>Is butchery, sometimes a single sorrow</p>
					<p>Will touch even heroes—and such was Suwarrow.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He said,—and in the kindest Calmuck tone,—</p>
					<p class="i2">"Why, Johnson, what the devil do you mean</p>
					<p>By bringing women here? They shall be shown</p>
					<p class="i2">All the attention possible, and seen</p>
					<p>In safety to the waggons, where alone</p>
					<p class="i2">In fact they can be safe. You should have been</p>
					<p>Aware this kind of baggage never thrives;</p>
					<p>Save wed a year, I hate recruits with wives"—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"May it please your Excellency," thus replied</p>
					<p class="i2">Our British friend, "these are the wives of others,</p>
					<p>And not our own. I am too qualified</p>
					<p class="i2">By service with my military brothers</p>
					<p>To break the rules by bringing one's own bride</p>
					<p class="i2">Into a camp: I know that nought so bothers</p>
					<p>The hearts of the heroic on a charge,</p>
					<p>As leaving a small family at large.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"But these are but two Turkish ladies, who</p>
					<p class="i2">With their attendant aided our escape,</p>
					<p>And afterwards accompanied us through</p>
					<p class="i2">A thousand perils in this dubious shape.</p>
					<p>To me this kind of life is not so new;</p>
					<p class="i2">To them, poor things, it is an awkward scrape:</p>
					<p>I therefore, if you wish me to fight freely,</p>
					<p>Request that they may both be used genteelly."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Meantime these two poor girls, with swimming eyes,</p>
					<p class="i2">Looked on as if in doubt if they could trust</p>
					<p>Their own protectors; nor was their surprise</p>
					<p class="i2">Less than their grief (and truly not less just)</p>
					<p>To see an old man, rather wild than wise</p>
					<p class="i2">In aspect, plainly clad, besmeared with dust,</p>
					<p>Stripped to his waistcoat, and that not too clean,</p>
					<p>More feared than all the Sultans ever seen.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For everything seemed resting on his nod,</p>
					<p class="i2">As they could read in all eyes. Now to them,</p>
					<p>Who were accustomed, as a sort of god,</p>
					<p class="i2">To see the Sultan, rich in many a gem,</p>
					<p>Like an imperial peacock stalk abroad</p>
					<p class="i2">(That royal bird, whose tail's a diadem,)</p>
					<p>With all the pomp of Power, it was a doubt</p>
					<p>How Power could condescend to do without.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>John Johnson, seeing their extreme dismay,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though little versed in feelings oriental,</p>
					<p>Suggested some slight comfort in his way:</p>
					<p class="i2">Don Juan, who was much more sentimental,</p>
					<p>Swore they should see him by the dawn of day,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or that the Russian army should repent all:</p>
					<p>And, strange to say, they found some consolation</p>
					<p>In this—for females like exaggeration.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then with tears, and sighs, and some slight kisses,</p>
					<p class="i2">They parted for the present—these to await,</p>
					<p>According to the artillery's hits or misses,</p>
					<p class="i2">What sages call Chance, Providence, or Fate—</p>
					<p>(Uncertainty is one of many blisses,</p>
					<p class="i2">A mortgage on Humanity's estate;)<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HV">[HV]</a></p>
					<p>While their belovéd friends began to arm,</p>
					<p>To burn a town which never did them harm.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Suwarrow,—who but saw things in the gross.</p>
					<p class="i2">Being much too gross to see them in detail,</p>
					<p>Who calculated life as so much dross,</p>
					<p class="i2">And as the wind a widowed nation's wail,</p>
					<p>And cared as little for his army's loss</p>
					<p class="i2">(So that their efforts should at length prevail)</p>
					<p>As wife and friends did for the boils of Job,—</p>
					<p>What was 't to him to hear two women sob?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Nothing.—The work of Glory still went on</p>
					<p class="i2">In preparations for a cannonade</p>
					<p>As terrible as that of Ilion,</p>
					<p class="i2">If Homer had found mortars ready made;</p>
					<p>But now, instead of slaying Priam's son,</p>
					<p class="i2">We only can but talk of escalade,</p>
					<p>Bombs, drums, guns, bastions, batteries, bayonets, bullets—</p>
					<p>Hard words, which stick in the soft Muses' gullets.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, thou eternal Homer! who couldst charm</p>
					<p class="i2">All ears, though long; all ages, though so short,</p>
					<p>By merely wielding with poetic arm</p>
					<p class="i2">Arms to which men will never more resort,</p>
					<p>Unless gunpowder should be found to harm</p>
					<p class="i2">Much less than is the hope of every court,</p>
					<p>Which now is leagued young Freedom to annoy;</p>
					<p>But they will not find Liberty a Troy:—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, thou eternal Homer! I have now</p>
					<p class="i2">To paint a siege, wherein more men were slain,</p>
					<p>With deadlier engines and a speedier blow,</p>
					<p class="i2">Than in thy Greek gazette of that campaign;</p>
					<p>And yet, like all men else, I must allow,</p>
					<p class="i2">To vie with thee would be about as vain</p>
					<p>As for a brook to cope with Ocean's flood,—</p>
					<p>But still we moderns equal you in blood:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HW">[HW]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If not in poetry, at least in fact;</p>
					<p class="i2">And fact is Truth, the grand desideratum!</p>
					<p>Of which, howe'er the Muse describes each act,</p>
					<p class="i2">There should be ne'ertheless a slight substratum.</p>
					<p>But now the town is going to be attacked;</p>
					<p class="i2">Great deeds are doing—how shall I relate 'em?</p>
					<p>Souls of immortal Generals! Phoebus watches</p>
					<p>To colour up his rays from your despatches.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HX">[HX]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh, ye great bulletins of Bonaparte!</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh, ye less grand long lists of killed and wounded!</p>
					<p>Shade of Leonidas, who fought so hearty,</p>
					<p class="i2">When my poor Greece was once, as now, surrounded!</p>
					<p>Oh, Cæsar's Commentaries! now impart, ye</p>
					<p class="i2">Shadows of Glory! (lest I be confounded),</p>
					<p>A portion of your fading twilight hues—</p>
					<p>So beautiful, so fleeting—to the Muse.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When I call "fading" martial immortality,</p>
					<p class="i2">I mean, that every age and every year,</p>
					<p>And almost every day, in sad reality,</p>
					<p class="i2">Some sucking hero is compelled to rear,</p>
					<p>Who, when we come to sum up the totality</p>
					<p class="i2">Of deeds to human happiness most dear,</p>
					<p>Turns out to be a butcher in great business,</p>
					<p>Afflicting young folks with a sort of dizziness.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Medals, rank, ribands, lace, embroidery, scarlet,</p>
					<p class="i2">Are things immortal to immortal man,</p>
					<p>As purple to the Babylonian harlot;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HY">[HY]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">An uniform to boys is like a fan</p>
					<p>To women; there is scarce a crimson varlet</p>
					<p class="i2">But deems himself the first in Glory's van.</p>
					<p>But Glory's glory; and if you would find</p>
					<p>What <i>that</i> is—ask the pig who sees the wind!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At least <i>he feels it</i>, and some say he <i>sees</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because he runs before it like a pig;</p>
					<p>Or, if that simple sentence should displease,</p>
					<p class="i2">Say, that he scuds before it like a brig,</p>
					<p>A schooner, or—but it is time to ease</p>
					<p class="i2">This Canto, ere my Muse perceives fatigue.</p>
					<p>The next shall ring a peal to shake all people,</p>
					<p>Like a bob-major from a village steeple.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Hark! through the silence of the cold, dull night,</p>
					<p class="i2">The hum of armies gathering rank on rank!</p>
					<p>Lo! dusky masses steal in dubious sight</p>
					<p class="i2">Along the leaguered wall and bristling bank</p>
					<p>Of the armed river, while with straggling light</p>
					<p class="i2">The stars peep through the vapours dim and dank,</p>
					<p>Which curl in various wreaths:—how soon the smoke</p>
					<p>Of Hell shall pall them in a deeper cloak!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here pause we for the present—as even then</p>
					<p class="i2">That awful pause, dividing Life from Death,</p>
					<p>Struck for an instant on the hearts of men,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Thousands of whom were drawing their last breath!</p>
					<p>A moment—and all will be Life again!</p>
					<p class="i2">The march! the charge! the shouts of either faith,</p>
					<p>Hurrah! and Allah! and one moment more—</p>
					<p>The death-cry drowning in the Battle's roar.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_HZ">[HZ]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_411">[411]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_364"><span class="label">[364]</span></a> {302}["These [the seventh and eighth] Cantos contain a full detail (like the storm in Canto Second) of the siege and assault of Ismael, with much of sarcasm on those butchers in large business, your mercenary soldiery.... With these things and these fellows it is necessary, in the present clash of philosophy and tyranny, to throw away the scabbard. I know it is against fearful odds; but the battle must be fought; and it will be eventually for the good of mankind, whatever it may be for the individual who risks himself."—Letter to Moore, August 8, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 101.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_365"><span class="label">[365]</span></a> [Byron attributes this phrase to Orator Henley (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 227); and to Bayes in the Duke of Buckingham's play, <i>The Rehearsal</i> (<i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 80).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HH"><span class="label">[HH]</span></a> <i>Of Fenelon, of Calvin and of Christ</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_366"><span class="label">[366]</span></a> [Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto II. stanza vii. line 1, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 103, note 2.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HI"><span class="label">[HI]</span></a> <i>Picking a pebble on the shore of Truth</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_367"><span class="label">[367]</span></a> ["Sir Isaac Newton, a little before he died, said, 'I don't know what I may seem to the world; but, as to myself, I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.'"—Spence, <i>Anecdotes</i> (quoting Chevalier Ramsay), 1858, p. 40.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HJ"><span class="label">[HJ]</span></a> {304}<i>From fools who dread to know the truth of Life</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_368"><span class="label">[368]</span></a> [Compare "Inscription on the Monument of a Newfoundland Dog," lines 7, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 280.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_369"><span class="label">[369]</span></a> [Aleksandr Vasilievitch Suvóroff (1729-1800) opened his attack on Ismail, November 30, 1790. His forces, including Kossacks, exceeded 27,000 men.—<i>Essai sur l'Histoire Ancienne et Moderne de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, par le Marquis Gabriel de Castelnau, 1827, ii. 201.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_370"><span class="label">[370]</span></a> ["Ismaël est situé sur la rive gauche du bras gauche (i.e. the ilia) du Danube."—<i>Ibid.</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_371"><span class="label">[371]</span></a> {305}[——"à peu près à quatre-vingts verstes de la mer: elle a près de trois milles toises de tour."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 201.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_372"><span class="label">[372]</span></a> ["On a compris dans ces fortifications un faubourg moldave, situé à la gauche de la ville, sur une hauteur qui la domine: l'ouvrage a été terminé par un Grec. Pour donner une idée des talens de cet ingénieur, il suffira de dire qu'il fit placer les palissades perpendiculairement sur le parapet, de manière qu'elles favorisaient les assiégeans, et arrêtaient le feu des assiégés."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 202.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_373"><span class="label">[373]</span></a> ["Le rempart en terre est prodigieusement élevé à cause de l'immense profondeur du fossé; il est cependant absolument rasant: il n'y a ni ouvrage avancé, ni chemin couvert."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 202.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_374"><span class="label">[374]</span></a> [Casemate is a work made under the rampart, like a cellar or cave, with loopholes to place guns in it, and is bomb proof.—<i>Milit. Dict.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_375"><span class="label">[375]</span></a> [When the breastwork of a battery is only of such height that the guns may fire over it without being obliged to make embrasures, the guns are said to fire in barbet.—<i>Ibid.</i>]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_376"><span class="label">[376]</span></a> {306}["Un bastion de pierres, ouvert par une gorge très-étroite, et dont les murailles son fort épaisses, a une batterie casematée et une à barbette; il défend la rive du Danube. Du côté droit de la ville est un cavalier de quarante pieds d'élévation à pic, garni de vingt-deux pièces de canon, et qui défend la partie gauche."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 202.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_377"><span class="label">[377]</span></a> ["Du côté du fleuve, la ville est absolument ouverte; les Turcs ne croyaient pas que les Russes pussent jamais avoir une flotille dans le Danube."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_378"><span class="label">[378]</span></a> [Meknop [supposed to be a corruption of McNab], etc., in line three, are real names: Strongenoff stands for Strogonof, Tschitsshakoff for Tchitchagof, and, perhaps, Chokenoff for Tchoglokof.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HK"><span class="label">[HK]</span></a> {307}—— <i>these discords of damnation</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_379"><span class="label">[379]</span></a> ["La première attaque était composée de trois colonnes, commandées par les lieutenans-generaux Paul Potiemkin, Serge Lwow, les généraux-majors Maurice Lascy, Théodore Meknop.... Trois autres colonnes ... avaient pour chefs le comte de Samoïlow, les généraux Êlie de Bezborodko, Michel Koutousow; les brigadiers Orlow, Platow, Ribaupierre.... La troisième attaque par eau n'avait que deux colonnes, sous les ordres des généraux-majors Ribas et Arséniew, des brigadiers Markoff et Tchépéga," etc.—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 207.</p>
					<p>Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza" style="margin-right:10em;">
							<p>"Oscharoffsky and Rostoffsky,</p>
							<p>And all the others that end in-offsky.</p>
							<hr style="margin:0.5em auto 0.5em 3em;"/>
							<p>And Kutousoff he cut them off," etc.</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib">Southey's <i>March to Moscow</i>, 1813.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_380"><span class="label">[380]</span></a> [Count Boris Petrowitch Scheremetov, Russian general, died 1819; Prince Alexis Borisovitch Kourakin (1759-1829), and Count Alexis Iwanowitch Moussine-Pouschkine (1744-1817) were distinguished statesmen; Chrematoff is, perhaps, a rhyming double of Scherematoff, and Koklophti "a match-piece" to Koclobski.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_381"><span class="label">[381]</span></a> {308}[Captain Smith, in the song—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"A Captain bold, in Halifax,</p>
							<p>That dwelt in country quarters,</p>
							<p>Seduc'd a maid who hang'd herself</p>
							<p>One Monday in her garters."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>See George Colman's farce, <i>Love Laughs at Locksmiths</i>, 1818, p. 31.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_382"><span class="label">[382]</span></a> {309}[Compare—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i8">"While to my shame I see</p>
							<p>The imminent death of twenty thousand men,</p>
							<p>That for a fantasy and trick of fame</p>
							<p>Go to their graves like beds."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="attrib"><i>Hamlet</i>, act iv. sc. 4, lines 56-59.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HL"><span class="label">[HL]</span></a> <i>The Conquest seemed not difficult</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_383"><span class="label">[383]</span></a> ["On s'était proposé deux buts également avantageux, par la construction de deux batteries sur l'île qui avoisine Ismaël: le premier, de bombarder la place, d'en abattre les principaux édifices avec du canon de quarante-huit, effet d'autant plus probable, que la ville étant bâtie en amphithéâtre, presque aucun coup ne serait perdu."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_384"><span class="label">[384]</span></a> ["Le second objet était de profiter de ce moment d'alarme pour que la flottille, agissant en même temps, put détruire celle des Turcs. Un troisième motif, et vraisemblablement le plus plausible, était de jeter la consternation parmi les Turcs, et de les engager à capituler."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HM"><span class="label">[HM]</span></a> {310}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p class="i2"><i>Unless they are as game as bull-dogs or even tarriers</i>.</p>
							<p>or, <i>A thing which sometimes hath occurred to warriors</i>,</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Unless they happened to be as game as tarriers</i>.—</p>
							<p class="i18">[MS. A. Alternative reading.]</p>
							<p class="i2"><i>Unless they are Game as bull-dogs or even terriers</i>.—[MS. B.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>(Byron erased the reading of MS. B. and superscribed the reading of the text.)</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_385"><span class="label">[385]</span></a> ["Une habitude blâmable, celle de mépriser son ennemi, fut la cause."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_386"><span class="label">[386]</span></a> [" ... du défaut de perfection dans la construction des batteries; on voulait agir promptement, et on négligea de donner aux ouvrages la solidité qu'ils exigaient."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_387"><span class="label">[387]</span></a> {311}["Le même esprit fit manquer l'effet de trois brûlots; on calcula mal la distance; on se pressa d'allumer la méche, ils brûlèrent au milieu du fleuve, et quoiqu'il fût six heures du matin, les Turcs, encore couchés, n'en prirent aucun ombrage."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_388"><span class="label">[388]</span></a> ["1<sup>er</sup> Dec. 1790. La flottille russe s'avança vers les sept heures; il en était neuf lorsqu'elle se trouva à cinquante toises de la ville [d'Ismaël]: elle souffrit, avec une constance calme, un feu de mitraille et de mousqueterie...."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_389"><span class="label">[389]</span></a> [" ... près de six heures ... les batteries de terre secondaient la flottille; mais on reconnut alors que les canonnades ne suffiraient pas pour réduire la place, on fit la retraite à une heure. Un lançon sauta pendant l'action, un autre dériva par la force du courant, et fut pris par l'ennemi."'—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 204.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_390"><span class="label">[390]</span></a> {312}[For Delhis, see <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii., note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_391"><span class="label">[391]</span></a> ["Les Turcs perdirent beaucoup de monde et plusieurs vaisseaux. A peine la retraite des Russes fut-elle remarquée, que les plus braves d'entre les ennemis se jetèrent dans de petites barques et essayèrent une descente: le Comte de Damas les mit en fuite, et leur tua plusieurs officiers et grand nombre de soldats."—<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, p. 204.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_392"><span class="label">[392]</span></a> ["On ne tarirait pas si on voulait rapporter tout ce que les Russes firent de mémorable dans cette journée; pour conter les hauts faits d'armes, pour particulariser toutes les actions d'éclat, il faudrait composer des volumes."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_393"><span class="label">[393]</span></a> ["Parmi les étrangers, le prince de Ligne se distingua de manière à mériter l'estime générale; de vrais chevaliers français, attirés par l'amour de la gloire, se montrèrent dignes d'elle: les plus marquans étaient le jeune Duc de Richelieu, les Comtes de Langeron et de Damas."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.</p>
					<p>Andrault, Comte de Langeron, born at Paris, January 13, 1763, on the outbreak of the Revolution (1790) took service in the Russian Army. He fought against the Swedes in 1790, and the Turks in 1791, and, after serving as a volunteer in the army of the Duke of Brunswick (1792-93), returned to Russia, and was raised to the rank of general in 1799. He commanded a division of the Russian Army in the German campaign of 1813, and entered Paris with Blücher, March 30, 1814. He was afterwards Governor of Odessa and of New Russia; and, a second time, fought against the Turks in 1828. He died at St. Petersburg, July 4, 1831. Joseph Elizabeth Roger, Comte de Damas d'Antigny, born at Paris, September 4, 1765, owed his commission in the Russian Army to the influence of the Prince de Ligne. He fought against the Turks in 1787-88, and was distinguished for bravery and daring. At the Restoration in 1814 he re-entered the French Army, was made Governor of Lyons; shared the temporary exile of Louis XVIII. at Ghent in 1815, and, in the following year, as commandant of a division, took part in repressing the revolutionary disturbances in the central and southern departments of France. He died at Cirey, September 3, 1823.—<i>La Grande Encyclopédie</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_394"><span class="label">[394]</span></a> {313}[Charles Joseph, Prince de Ligne, was born at Brussels, May 12, 1735. In 1782 he visited St. Petersburg as envoy of the Emperor Joseph II., won Catherine's favour, and was appointed Field Marshal in the Russian Army. In 1788 he was sent to assist Potemkin at the siege of Ochakof. His <i>Mélanges Militaires, etc.</i>, were first published in 1795. He died in November, 1814.</p>
					<p>Josef de Ribas (1737-c. 1797).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_395"><span class="label">[395]</span></a> ["L'Amiral de Ribas ... déclara, en plein conseil, que ce n'était qu'en donnant l'assaut qu'on obtiendrait la place: cet avis parut hardi; on lui opposa mille raisons, auxquelles il répondit par de meilleures." —<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii, 205.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_396"><span class="label">[396]</span></a> {314}[Prince (Gregor Alexandrovitch) Potemkin, born 1736, died October 15, 1791. "He alighted from his carriage in the midst of the highway, threw himself on the grass, and died under a tree" (<i>Life of Catherine II</i>., by W. Tooke, 1880, iii. 324). His character has been drawn by Louis Philippe, Comte de Ségur, who, writes Tooke (<i>ibid</i>., p. 326), "lived a long time in habits of intimacy with him, and was so obliging as to delineate it at our solicitation." "In his person were collected the most opposite defects and advantages of every kind. He was avaricious and ostentatious, ... haughty and obliging, politic and confiding, licentious and superstitious, bold and timid, ambitious and indiscreet; lavish of his bounties to his relations, his mistresses, and his favourites, yet frequently paying neither his household nor his creditors. His consequence always depended on a woman, and he was always unfaithful to her. Nothing could equal the activity of his mind, nor the indolence of his body. No dangers could appal his courage; no difficulties force him to abandon his projects. But the success of an enterprise always brought on disgust.... Everything with him was desultory; business, pleasure, temper, carriage. His presence was a restraint on every company. He was morose to all that stood in awe of him, and caressed all such as accosted him with familiarity.... None had read less than he; few people were better informed.... One while he formed the project of becoming Duke of Courland; at another he thought of bestowing on himself the crown of Poland. He frequently gave intimations of an intention to make himself a bishop, or even a simple monk. He built a superb palace, and wanted to sell it before it was finished. In his youth he had pleased her [Catherine] by the ardour of his passion, by his valour, and by his masculine beauty.... Become the rival of Orloff, he performed for his sovereign whatever the most romantic passion could inspire. He put out his eye, to free it from a blemish which diminished his beauty. Banished by his rival, he ran to meet death in battle, and returned with glory."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_397"><span class="label">[397]</span></a> {315}["Ce projet, remis à un autre jour, éprouva encore les plus grandes difficultés; son courage les surmonta: il ne s'agíssait que de déterminer le Prince Potiemkin; il y réussit. Tandis qu'il se démenait pour l'exécution de projet agréé, on construisait de nouvelles batteries; on comptait, le 12 décembre, quatre-vingts pièces de canon sur le bord du Danube, et cette journée se passa en vives canonnades."—<i>Histoire de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HN"><span class="label">[HN]</span></a> <i>Into all aspirants for martial praise</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_398"><span class="label">[398]</span></a> ["Le 13<sup>e</sup>, une partie des troupes était embarquée; on allait lever le siège: un courrier arrive.... Ce courrier annonce, de la part du prince, que le maréchal Souwarow va prendre le commandement des forces réunies sous Ismaël."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 205.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_399"><span class="label">[399]</span></a> {316}["La lettre du Prince Potiemkin à Souwarow est très courte; elle peint le caractere de ces deux personnages. La voici dans toute sa teneur: <i>'Vous prendrez Ismaël à quel frix que ce soit!'</i>"—<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_400"><span class="label">[400]</span></a> ["[Le courrier] est témoin des cris de joie du Turc, qui se croyait à la fin de ses maux."-<i>Ibid</i>., p. 205.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_401"><span class="label">[401]</span></a> ["Beat," as in "dead-beat," is occasionally used for "beaten."—See <i>N.E.D.</i>, art. "Beat," 10.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_402"><span class="label">[402]</span></a> ["Le 16<sup>e</sup>, on voit venir de loin deux hommes courant à toute bride: on les prit pour des Kozaks; l'un était Souwarow, et l'autre son guide, portant un paquet gros comme le poing, et renfermant le bagage du général."-<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.</p>
					<p>M. de Castelnau in his description of the arrival of Suvóroff on the field of battle (<i>Hist, de la</i> N.R., 1827, ii. pp, 205, 206) summarizes the Journal of the Duc de Richelieu. The original passage runs as follows:—</p>
					<p>"L'arrivée du comte Souvorow produisit un grand effet parmi les troupes.... La manière d'être plus que simple, puis-qu'il logeait sous une canonnière, et qu'il n'avait pas même de chaises dans sa tente, son affabilité, sa bonhomie lui conciliaient l'affection de tous les individus de son armée. Cet homme singulier qui ressemble plus à un chef de cosaques ou de Tartares, qu'au général d'une armée européenne, est doué d'une intrépidité et d'une hardiesse peu communes.... La manière de vivre, de s'habiller et de parler du comte Souvorow, est aussi singulière que ses opinions militaires.... Il mangeait dans sa tente assis par terre autour d'une natte sur laquelle il prenait le plus détestable repas. L'après-midi, un semblable repas lui servait de souper, il s'endormait ensuite pendant quelques heures, passait une partie de la nuit à chanter, et a la pointe du jour il sortait presque nu et se roulait sur l'herbe assurant que cet exercice lui était necessaire pour le préserver des rhumatismes.... Sa manière de s'exprimer dans toutes les langues est aussi singulière que toute sa façon d'être, ses phrases sont incohérentes, et s'il n'est pas insensé, il dit et fait du moins tout ce qu'il faut pour le paraître; mais il est heureux et cette qualité dont le Cardinal Mazarin faisait tant de cas, est, à bon droit, fort estimée de l'Impératrice et du Prince Potemkin ... Le moment de l'arrivée du Comte Souvorow fut annoncé par une décharge générale des batteries ou camp et de la flotte."—<i>Journal de mon Voyage en Allemagne</i>. <i>Soc, Imp. d'Hist de Russie</i>, 1886, tom. liv. pp. 168, 169.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HO"><span class="label">[HO]</span></a> {317}<i>That sage John Bull</i>——.—[MS.]</p>
					<p><i>That fool John Bull</i>——.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_403"><span class="label">[403]</span></a> {319}["La première attaque était composée de trois colonnes ... Trois autres colonnes, destinées a la seconde attaque, avaient pour chefs, etc.... La troisième attaque par eau n'avait que deux colonnes."—<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 207.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_404"><span class="label">[404]</span></a> ["On construisit de nouvelles batteries le 18<sup>e</sup>.... On tint un conseil de guerre, on y examina les plans pour l'assaut proposés par M. de Ribas, ils réunirent tous les souffrages."—<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 208.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HP"><span class="label">[HP]</span></a> <i>For once by some odd sort of magnanimity.</i>—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HQ"><span class="label">[HQ]</span></a> <i>Bellona shook her spear with much sublimity.</i>—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_405"><span class="label">[405]</span></a> Fact: Suwaroff did this in person.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HR"><span class="label">[HR]</span></a>—— <i>and neither swerve nor spill.</i>—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_406"><span class="label">[406]</span></a> ["Le 19<sup>e</sup> et le 20<sup>e</sup>, Souwarow exerçailes soldats; il leur montra comment il fallait s'y prendre pour escalader; il enseigna aux recrues la manière de donner le coup de baïonnette."—<i>Ibid</i>., p. 208.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_407"><span class="label">[407]</span></a> {320}["Pour ces exercices d'un nouveau genre, il se servit de fascines disposées de manière a représenter un Turc."-<i>Hist, de la Nauvelle Russie</i>, ii. 208.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HS">
							<span class="label">[HS]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>At which your wise men laughed, but all their Wit is</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Lost, for his repartee was taking cities.</i>—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p>
						<a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HT">
							<span class="label">[HT]</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>For some were thinking of their wives and families,</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>And others of themselves</i> (<i>as poet Samuel is</i>).</p>
							<p class="i15">—[MS. Alternative reading.]</p>
							<p><i>And others of themselves</i> (<i>as my friend Samuel is</i>).</p>
							<p class="i15">—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_408"><span class="label">[408]</span></a> [For a detailed account of Suvóroff's personal characteristics, see <i>The Life of Field-Marshal Souvaroff</i>, by L.M.P. Tranchant de Laverne, 1814, pp. 267-291; and <i>Suvóroff</i>, by Lieut.-Colonel Spalding, 1890, pp. 222-229.</p>
					<p>Byron's epithet "buffoon" (line 5) may, perhaps, be traced to the following anecdote recorded by Tranchant de Laverne (p. 281): "During the first war of Poland ... he published, in the order of the day, that at the first crowing of the cock the troops would march to attack the enemy, and caused the spy to send word that the Russians would be upon them some time after midnight. But about eight o'clock Souvarof ran through the camp, imitating the crowing of a cock.... The enemy, completely surprised, lost a great number of men."</p>
					<p>For his "praying" (line 6), <i>vide ibid.</i>, pp. 272, 273: "He made a short prayer after each meal, and again when going to bed. He usually performed his devotions before an image of St. Nicholas, the patron saint of Russia."</p>
					<p>"Half-dirt" (line 5) is, however, a calumny (<i>ibid</i>. p. 272): "It was his custom to rise at the earliest dawn; several buckets of cold water were thrown over his naked body."</p>
					<p>The same writer (p. 268) repudiates the charges of excessive barbarity and cruelty brought against Suvóroff by C.F.P. Masson, in his <i>Mémoires Secrets sur la Russie</i> (<i>vide</i>, e.g., ed. 1800, i. 311): "Souvorow ne scroit que le plus ridicule bouffon, s'il n'étoit pas montré le plus barbare guerrier. C'est un monstre, qui renferme dans le corps d'un singe l'âme d'un chien de boucher. Attila, son compatriote, et don't il descend, peut-être ne fut ni si heureux, ni si féroce."</p>
					<p>Suvóroff did not regard himself as "half-demon." "Your pencil," he reminded the artist Müller, "will delineate the features of my face. These are visible: but my inner man is hidden. I must tell you that I have shed rivers of blood. I tremble, but I love my neighbour. In my whole life I have made no one unhappy; not an insect hath perished by my hand. I was little; I was big. In fortune's ebb and flow, relying on God, I stood immovable—even as now." (<i>Suvóroff</i>, 1890, p. 228, note.)]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_409"><span class="label">[409]</span></a> {322}[See, for instance, <i>The Storm</i>, in "Souvarof's Catechism," Appendix (pp. 299-305) to the <i>Life, etc.</i>, by Tranchant de Laverne, 1814: "Break down the fence.... Fly over the walls! Stab them on the ramparts!... Fire down the streets! Fire briskly!... Kill every enemy in the streets! Let the cavalry hack them!" etc.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_410"><span class="label">[410]</span></a> {323}[The "tusk" of the plough is the coulter or share. Compare "Dens vomeris" (Virg., <i>Georg.</i>, i. 22).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HU"><span class="label">[HU]</span></a> {324}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>Of thine imaginary deathless bough</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>The unebbing sea of blood and tears must flow</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HV"><span class="label">[HV]</span></a> {326}<i>Entailed upon Humanity's estate</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HW"><span class="label">[HW]</span></a> {327}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>As a brook's stream to cope with Ocean's flood shed</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>But still we moderns equal you in bloodshed</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HX"><span class="label">[HX]</span></a> {328}</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>
								<i>As in a General's letter when well whacked</i>
							</p>
							<p class="i2">
								<i>Whatever deeds be done I will relate 'em,</i>
							</p>
							<p>
								<i>With some small variations in the text</i>
							</p>
							<p><i>Of killed and wounded who will not be missed</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HY"><span class="label">[HY]</span></a> <i>Whose leisure hours are wasted on an harlot</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_HZ"><span class="label">[HZ]</span></a> {329}<i>The desperate death-cry and the Battle's roar</i>.—[MS. erased.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_411"><span class="label">[411]</span></a> End of Canto 7. 1822.—[MS.]</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
