<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication z3998:poem">
			<h2>Dedication<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_1">[1]</a></h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Bob Southey! You're a poet—Poet-laureate,</p>
					<p class="i2">And representative of all the race;</p>
					<p>Although 't is true that you turned out a Tory at</p>
					<p class="i2">Last,—yours has lately been a common case;</p>
					<p>And now, my Epic Renegade! what are ye at?</p>
					<p class="i2">With all the Lakers, in and out of place?</p>
					<p>A nest of tuneful persons, to my eye</p>
					<p>Like "four and twenty Blackbirds in a pye;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Which pye being opened they began to sing,"</p>
					<p class="i2">(This old song and new simile holds good),</p>
					<p>"A dainty dish to set before the King,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Or Regent, who admires such kind of food;—</p>
					<p>And Coleridge, too, has lately taken wing,</p>
					<p class="i2">But like a hawk encumbered with his hood,—</p>
					<p>Explaining Metaphysics to the nation—</p>
					<p>I wish he would explain his Explanation.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_2">[2]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You, Bob! are rather insolent, you know,</p>
					<p class="i2">At being disappointed in your wish</p>
					<p>To supersede all warblers here below,</p>
					<p class="i2">And be the only Blackbird in the dish;</p>
					<p>And then you overstrain yourself, or so,</p>
					<p class="i2">And tumble downward like the flying fish</p>
					<p>Gasping on deck, because you soar too high, Bob,</p>
					<p>And fall, for lack of moisture, quite a-dry, Bob!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_3">[3]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Wordsworth, in a rather long "Excursion,"</p>
					<p class="i2">(I think the quarto holds five hundred pages),</p>
					<p>Has given a sample from the vasty version</p>
					<p class="i2">Of his new system<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_4">[4]</a> to perplex the sages;</p>
					<p>'T is poetry-at least by his assertion,</p>
					<p class="i2">And may appear so when the dog-star rages—</p>
					<p>And he who understands it would be able</p>
					<p>To add a story to the Tower of Babel.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>You—Gentlemen! by dint of long seclusion</p>
					<p class="i2">From better company, have kept your own</p>
					<p>At Keswick, and, through still continued fusion</p>
					<p class="i2">Of one another's minds, at last have grown</p>
					<p>To deem as a most logical conclusion,</p>
					<p class="i2">That Poesy has wreaths for you alone:</p>
					<p>There is a narrowness in such a notion,</p>
					<p>Which makes me wish you'd change your lakes for Ocean.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I would not imitate the petty thought,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor coin my self-love to so base a vice,</p>
					<p>For all the glory your conversion brought,</p>
					<p class="i2">Since gold alone should not have been its price.</p>
					<p>You have your salary; was 't for that you wrought?</p>
					<p class="i2">And Wordsworth has his place in the Excise.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_5">[5]</a></p>
					<p>You're shabby fellows—true—but poets still,</p>
					<p>And duly seated on the Immortal Hill.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Your bays may hide the baldness of your brows—</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps some virtuous blushes;—let them go—</p>
					<p>To you I envy neither fruit nor boughs—</p>
					<p class="i2">And for the fame you would engross below,</p>
					<p>The field is universal, and allows</p>
					<p class="i2">Scope to all such as feel the inherent glow:</p>
					<p>Scott, Rogers, Campbell, Moore, and Crabbe, will try</p>
					<p>'Gainst you the question with posterity.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For me, who, wandering with pedestrian Muses,</p>
					<p class="i2">Contend not with you on the wingéd steed,</p>
					<p>I wish your fate may yield ye, when she chooses,</p>
					<p class="i2">The fame you envy, and the skill you need;</p>
					<p>And, recollect, a poet nothing loses</p>
					<p class="i2">In giving to his brethren their full meed</p>
					<p>Of merit—and complaint of present days</p>
					<p>Is not the certain path to future praise.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He that reserves his laurels for posterity</p>
					<p class="i2">(Who does not often claim the bright reversion)</p>
					<p>Has generally no great crop to spare it, he</p>
					<p class="i2">Being only injured by his own assertion;</p>
					<p>And although here and there some glorious rarity</p>
					<p class="i2">Arise like Titan from the sea's immersion,</p>
					<p>The major part of such appellants go</p>
					<p>To—God knows where—for no one else can know.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If, fallen in evil days on evil tongues,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_6">[6]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Milton appealed to the Avenger, Time,</p>
					<p>If Time, the Avenger, execrates his wrongs,</p>
					<p class="i2">And makes the word "Miltonic" mean "<i>Sublime</i>,"</p>
					<p><i>He</i> deigned not to belie his soul in songs,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor turn his very talent to a crime;</p>
					<p><i>He</i> did not loathe the Sire to laud the Son,</p>
					<p>But closed the tyrant-hater he begun.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Think'st thou, could he—the blind Old Man—arise</p>
					<p class="i2">Like Samuel from the grave, to freeze once more</p>
					<p>The blood of monarchs with his prophecies,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or be alive again—again all hoar</p>
					<p>With time and trials, and those helpless eyes,</p>
					<p class="i2">And heartless daughters—worn—and pale<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_7">[7]</a>—and poor;</p>
					<p>Would <i>he</i> adore a sultan? <i>he</i> obey</p>
					<p>The intellectual eunuch Castlereagh?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_8">[8]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Cold-blooded, smooth-faced, placid miscreant!</p>
					<p class="i2">Dabbling its sleek young hands in Erin's gore,</p>
					<p>And thus for wider carnage taught to pant,</p>
					<p class="i2">Transferred to gorge upon a sister shore,</p>
					<p>The vulgarest tool that Tyranny could want,</p>
					<p class="i2">With just enough of talent, and no more,</p>
					<p>To lengthen fetters by another fixed,</p>
					<p>And offer poison long already mixed.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>An orator of such set trash of phrase</p>
					<p class="i2">Ineffably—legitimately vile,</p>
					<p>That even its grossest flatterers dare not praise,</p>
					<p class="i2">Nor foes—all nations—condescend to smile,—</p>
					<p>Nor even a sprightly blunder's spark can blaze</p>
					<p class="i2">From that Ixion grindstone's ceaseless toil,</p>
					<p>That turns and turns to give the world a notion</p>
					<p>Of endless torments and perpetual motion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A bungler even in its disgusting trade,</p>
					<p class="i2">And botching, patching, leaving still behind</p>
					<p>Something of which its masters are afraid—</p>
					<p class="i2">States to be curbed, and thoughts to be confined,</p>
					<p>Conspiracy or Congress to be made—</p>
					<p class="i2">Cobbling at manacles for all mankind—</p>
					<p>A tinkering slave-maker, who mends old chains,</p>
					<p>With God and Man's abhorrence for its gains.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If we may judge of matter by the mind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Emasculated to the marrow <i>It</i></p>
					<p>Hath but two objects, how to serve, and bind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Deeming the chain it wears even men may fit,</p>
					<p>Eutropius of its many masters,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_9">[9]</a>—blind</p>
					<p class="i2">To worth as freedom, wisdom as to wit,</p>
					<p>Fearless—because <i>no</i> feeling dwells in ice,</p>
					<p>Its very courage stagnates to a vice.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_10">[10]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Where shall I turn me not to <i>view</i> its bonds,</p>
					<p class="i2">For I will never <i>feel</i> them?—Italy!</p>
					<p>Thy late reviving Roman soul desponds</p>
					<p class="i2">Beneath the lie this State-thing breathed o'er thee<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_11">[11]—</a></p>
					<p>Thy clanking chain, and Erin's yet green wounds,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have voices—tongues to cry aloud for me.</p>
					<p>Europe has slaves—allies—kings—armies still—</p>
					<p>And Southey lives to sing them very ill.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Meantime, Sir Laureate, I proceed to dedicate,</p>
					<p class="i2">In honest simple verse, this song to you.</p>
					<p>And, if in flattering strains I do not predicate,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is that I still retain my "buff and blue;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_12">[12]</a></p>
					<p>My politics as yet are all to educate:</p>
					<p class="i2">Apostasy's so fashionable, too,</p>
					<p>To keep <i>one</i> creed's a task grown quite Herculean;</p>
					<p>Is it not so, my Tory, ultra-Julian?<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_13">[13]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Venice, Sept. 16, 1818.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> {3}["As the Poem is to be published anonymously, <i>omit</i> the Dedication. I won't attack the dog in the dark. Such things are for scoundrels and renegadoes like himself" [<i>Revise</i>]. See, too, letter to Murray, May 6, 1819 (<i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 294); and Southey's letter to Bedford, July 31, 1819 (<i>Selections from the Letters, etc.</i>, 1856, in. 137, 138). According to the editor of the <i>Works of Lord Byron</i>, 1833 (xv. 101), the existence of the Dedication "became notorious" in consequence of Hobhouse's article in the <i>Westminster Review</i>, 1824. He adds, for Southey's consolation and encouragement, that "for several years the verses have been selling in the streets as a broadside," and that "it would serve no purpose to exclude them on the present occasion." But Southey was not appeased. He tells Allan Cunningham (June 3, 1833) that "the new edition of Byron's works is ... one of the very worst symptoms of these bad times" (<i>Life and Correspondence</i>, 1850, vi. 217).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> {4}[In the "Critique on <i>Bertram</i>," which Coleridge contributed to the <i>Courier</i>, in 1816, and republished in the <i>Biographia Literaria</i>, in 1817 (chap, xxiii.), he gives a detailed analysis of "the old Spanish play, entitled <i>Atheista Fulminato</i> [<i>vide ante</i>, the '<a class="pginternal" href="#INTRODUCTION_TO_DON_JUAN">Introduction to <i>Don Juan</i></a>'] ... which under various names (<i>Don Juan</i>, the <i>Libertine</i>, etc.) has had its day of favour in every country throughout Europe ... Rank, fortune, wit, talent, acquired knowledge, and liberal accomplishments, with beauty of person, vigorous health, and constitutional hardihood,—all these advantages, elevated by the habits and sympathies of noble birth and national character, are supposed to have combined in Don Juan, so as to give him the means of carrying into all its practical consequences the doctrine of a godless nature, as the sole ground and efficient cause not only of all things, events, and appearances, but likewise of all our thoughts, sensations, impulses, and actions. Obedience to nature is the only virtue." It is possible that Byron traced his own lineaments in this too life-like portraiture, and at the same time conceived the possibility of a new Don Juan, "made up" after his own likeness. His extreme resentment at Coleridge's just, though unwise and uncalled-for, attack on Maturin stands in need of some explanation. See letter to Murray, September 17, 1817 (<i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 172).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> ["Have you heard that <i>Don Juan</i> came over with a dedication to me, in which Lord Castlereagh and I (being hand in glove intimates) were coupled together for abuse as 'the two Roberts'? A fear of persecution (<i>sic</i>) from the <i>one</i> Robert is supposed to be the reason why it has been suppressed" (Southey to Rev. H. Hill, August 13, 1819, <i>Selections from the Letters, etc.</i>, 1856, iii. 142). For "Quarrel between Byron and Southey," see Introduction to <i>The Vision of Judgment</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 475-480; and <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 377-399 (Appendix I.).]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_4"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> [The reference must be to the detailed enumeration of "the powers requisite for the production of poetry," and the subsequent antithesis of Imagination and Fancy contained in the Preface to the collected <i>Poems of William Wordsworth</i>, published in 1815. In the Preface to the <i>Excursion</i> (1814) it is expressly stated that "it is not the author's intention formally to announce a system."]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_5"><span class="label">[5]</span></a> {5}Wordsworth's place may be in the Customs—it is, I think, in that or the Excise—besides another at Lord Lonsdale's table, where this poetical charlatan and political parasite licks up the crumbs with a hardened alacrity; the converted Jacobin having long subsided into the clownish sycophant [<i>despised retainer</i>,—<i>MS. erased</i>] of the worst prejudices of the aristocracy.</p>
					<p>[Wordsworth obtained his appointment as Distributor of Stamps for the county of Westmoreland in March, 1813, through Lord Lonsdale's "patronage" (see his letter, March 6, 1813). <i>The Excursion</i> was dedicated to Lord Lonsdale in a sonnet dated July 29, 1814—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Oft through thy fair domains, illustrious Peer,</p>
							<p>In youth I roamed ...</p>
							<p>Now, by thy care befriended, I appear</p>
							<p>Before thee, Lonsdale, and this Work present."]</p>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_6"><span class="label">[6]</span></a> {6}[<i>Paradise Lost</i>, vii. 25, 26.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_7"><span class="label">[7]</span></a> {7}"Pale, but not cadaverous:"—Milton's two elder daughters are said to have robbed him of his books, besides cheating and plaguing him in the economy of his house, etc., etc. His feelings on such an outrage, both as a parent and a scholar, must have been singularly painful. Hayley compares him to Lear. See part third, <i>Life of Milton</i>, by W. Hayley (or Hailey, as spelt in the edition before me).</p>
					<p>[<i>The Life of Milton</i>, by William Hailey (<i>sic</i>), Esq., Basil, 1799, p. 186.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_8"><span class="label">[8]</span></a> Or—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"Would <i>he</i> subside into a hackney Laureate—</p>
							<p>A scribbling, self-sold, soul-hired, scorned Iscariot?"</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>I doubt if "Laureate" and "Iscariot" be good rhymes, but must say, as Ben Jonson did to Sylvester, who challenged him to rhyme with—</p>
					<div class="poem">
						<div class="stanza">
							<p>"I, John Sylvester,</p>
							<p>Lay with your sister."</p>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Jonson answered—"I, Ben Jonson, lay with your wife." Sylvester answered,—"That is not rhyme."—"No," said Ben Jonson; "but it is <i>true</i>."</p>
					<p>[For Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, see <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 538, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 568, note 2; and <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 108, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_9"><span class="label">[9]</span></a> {8}For the character of Eutropius, the eunuch and minister at the court of Arcadius, see Gibbon, [<i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, ii. 307, 308].</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_10"><span class="label">[10]</span></a> ["Mr. John Murray,—As publisher to the Admiralty and of various Government works, if the five stanzas concerning Castlereagh should risk your ears or the Navy List, you may omit them in the publication—in that case the two last lines of stanza 10 [<i>i.e</i>. 11] must end with the couplet (lines 7, 8) inscribed in the margin. The stanzas on Castlerighi (as the Italians call him) are 11, 12, 13, 14, 15."—<i>MS. M</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_11"><span class="label">[11]</span></a> [Commenting on a "pathetic sentiment" of Leoni, the author of the Italian translation of <i>Childe Harold</i> ("Sciagurata condizione di questa mia patria!"), Byron affirms that the Italians execrated Castlereagh "as the cause, by the conduct of the English at Genoa." "Surely," he exclaims, "that man will not die in his bed: there is no spot of the earth where his name is not a hissing and a curse. Imagine what must be the man's talent for Odium, who has contrived to spread his infamy like a pestilence from Ireland to Italy, and to make his name an execration in all languages."—Letter to Murray, May 8, 1820, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 22, note 1.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_12"><span class="label">[12]</span></a> {9}[Charles James Fox and the Whig Club of his time adopted a uniform of blue and buff. Hence the livery of the <i>Edinburgh Review</i>.]</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_13"><span class="label">[13]</span></a> I allude not to our friend Landor's hero, the traitor Count Julian, but to Gibbon's hero, vulgarly yclept "The Apostate."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
