<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<!--Preface to Cantos VI, VII, and VIII-->
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Marquis Gabriel de Castelnau, author of an <i>Essai sur LвҖҷHistoire ancienne et moderne de la Nouvelle Russie</i> (Sec. Ed. 3В tom. 1827), was, at one time, resident at Odessa, where he met and made the acquaintance of Armand Emanuel, Duc de Richelieu, who took part in the siege of Ismail. M. LГ©on de Crousaz-CrГ©tet describes him as вҖңancien surintendant des thГ©Гўtres sous lвҖҷEmpereur Paul.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Le Duc de Richelieu</i>, 1897, p. 83.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, second Marquis of Londonderry (1769вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1822), see <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 108, 109, note 1.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Samuel Ferrand Waddington, born 1759, hop-grower and radical politician, first came into notice as the chairman of public meetings in favour of making peace with the French in 1793. He was the author, <i>inter alia</i>, of <i>A Key to a Delicate Investigation</i>, 1812, and <i>An Address to the People of the United Kingdom</i>, 1812. He was alive in 1822. James Watson (1766вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1838), a radical agitator of the following of Thomas Spence, was engaged, in the autumn of 1816, in an abortive conspiracy to blow up cavalry barracks, barricade the streets, and seize the Bank and the Tower. He was tried for high treason before Lord Ellenborough, and acquitted.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. 3, lines 7, 8.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I say by the <i>law</i> of the <i>land</i>вҒ вҖ”the laws of humanity judge more gently; but as the legitimates have always the law in their mouths, let them here make the most of it. <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Mr.В Joseph Carttar, of Deptford, coroner for the County of Kent, addressed the jury at some length. The following sentences are taken from the report of the inquest, contained in <i>The Annual Biography and Obituary for the year 1823</i>, vol. vii. p. 57: вҖңAs a public man, it is impossible for me to weigh his character in any scales that I can hold. In private life I believe the world will admit that a more amiable man could not be found.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ If it should unfortunately appear that there is not sufficient evidence to prove what is generally considered the indication of a disordered mind, I trust that the jury will pay some attention to my humble opinion, which is, that no man can be in his proper senses at the moment he commits so rash an act as self-murder.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The Bible declares that a man clings to nothing so strongly as his own life, I therefore view it as an axiom, and an abstract principle, that a man must necessarily be out of his mind at the moment of destroying himself.вҖқ Byron, probably, read the report of the inquest in CobbettвҖҷs <i>Weekly Register</i> (August 17, 1822, vol. 43, pp. 389вҒ вҖ“вҒ 425). The вҖңeulogyвҖқ was in perfectly good taste, but there can be little doubt that if вҖңWaddington or WatsonвҖқ had cut <i>their</i> вҖңcarotid arteries,вҖқ the verdict would have been different.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From this number must be excepted Canning. Canning is a genius, almost a universal one, an orator, a wit, a poet, a statesman; and no man of talent can long pursue the path of his late predecessor, Lord C. If ever man saved his country, Canning <i>can</i>, but <i>will</i> he? I for one, hope so.</p>
					<p>[The phrase, вҖңgreat moral lesson,вҖқ was employed by the Duke of Wellington, <i>Г  propos</i> of the restoration of pictures and statues to their вҖңrightful owners,вҖқ in a despatch addressed to Castlereagh, under date, Paris, September 19, 1815 (<i>The Dispatches, etc.</i> (ed. by Colonel Gurwood), 1847, viii. 270). The words, вҖңmoral lesson,вҖқ as applied to the French generally, are to be found in ScottвҖҷs <i>Field of Waterloo</i> (conclusion, stanza vi. line 3), which was written about the same time as the despatch. Byron quotes them in his вҖңOde from the French,вҖқ stanza iv. line 8 (see <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 434, note 1). There is a satirical allusion to the DukeвҖҷs вҖңassumption of the didacticвҖқ about teaching a вҖңgreat moral lessonвҖқ in the Preface to the first number of the <i>Liberal</i> (1822, p. xi.).] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When Lord Sandwich said вҖңhe did not know the difference between orthodoxy and heterodoxy,вҖқ Warburton, the bishop, replied, вҖңOrthodoxy, my lord, is <i>my doxy</i>, and heterodoxy is <i>another manвҖҷs</i> doxy.вҖқ A prelate of the present day has discovered, it seems, a <i>third</i> kind of doxy, which has not greatly exalted in the eyes of the elect that which Bentham calls вҖңChurch-of-Englandism.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[For the вҖңprelate,вҖқ see <i>Letters</i>, 1902, vi. 101, note 2.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the Duke of Wellington and the Holy Alliance, see the Introduction to <i>The Age of Bronze, Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 538, 561.] <a href="foreword-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Dedication-->
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAs the Poem is to be published anonymously, <i>omit</i> the Dedication. I wonвҖҷt attack the dog in the dark. Such things are for scoundrels and renegadoes like himselfвҖқ [<i>Revise</i>]. See, too, letter to Murray, May 6, 1819 (<i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 294); and SoutheyвҖҷs letter to Bedford, July 31, 1819 (<i>Selections from the Letters, etc.</i>, 1856, in. 137, 138). According to the editor of the <i>Works of Lord Byron</i>, 1833 (xv. 101), the existence of the Dedication вҖңbecame notoriousвҖқ in consequence of HobhouseвҖҷs article in the <i>Westminster Review</i>, 1824. He adds, for SoutheyвҖҷs consolation and encouragement, that вҖңfor several years the verses have been selling in the streets as a broadside,вҖқ and that вҖңit would serve no purpose to exclude them on the present occasion.вҖқ But Southey was not appeased. He tells Allan Cunningham (June 3, 1833) that вҖңthe new edition of ByronвҖҷs works isвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ one of the very worst symptoms of these bad timesвҖқ (<i>Life and Correspondence</i>, 1850, vi. 217).] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In the вҖңCritique on <i>Bertram</i>,вҖқ which Coleridge contributed to the <i>Courier</i>, in 1816, and republished in the <i>Biographia Literaria</i>, in 1817 (chap, xxiii.), he gives a detailed analysis of вҖңthe old Spanish play, entitled <i>Atheista Fulminato</i> [<i>vide ante</i>, the вҖҳ<a>Introduction to <i>Don Juan</i></a>вҖҳ]вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ which under various names (<i>Don Juan</i>, the <i>Libertine</i>, etc.) has had its day of favour in every country throughout EuropeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Rank, fortune, wit, talent, acquired knowledge, and liberal accomplishments, with beauty of person, vigorous health, and constitutional hardihoodвҒ вҖ”all these advantages, elevated by the habits and sympathies of noble birth and national character, are supposed to have combined in Don Juan, so as to give him the means of carrying into all its practical consequences the doctrine of a godless nature, as the sole ground and efficient cause not only of all things, events, and appearances, but likewise of all our thoughts, sensations, impulses, and actions. Obedience to nature is the only virtue.вҖқ It is possible that Byron traced his own lineaments in this too life-like portraiture, and at the same time conceived the possibility of a new Don Juan, вҖңmade upвҖқ after his own likeness. His extreme resentment at ColeridgeвҖҷs just, though unwise and uncalled-for, attack on Maturin stands in need of some explanation. See letter to Murray, September 17, 1817 (<i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 172).] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHave you heard that <i>Don Juan</i> came over with a dedication to me, in which Lord Castlereagh and I (being hand in glove intimates) were coupled together for abuse as вҖҳthe two RobertsвҖҷ? A fear of persecution (<i>sic</i>) from the <i>one</i> Robert is supposed to be the reason why it has been suppressedвҖқ (Southey to Rev. H. Hill, August 13, 1819, <i>Selections from the Letters, etc.</i>, 1856, iii. 142). For вҖңQuarrel between Byron and Southey,вҖқ see Introduction to <i>The Vision of Judgment</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 475вҒ вҖ“вҒ 480; and <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 377вҒ вҖ“вҒ 399 (Appendix I.).] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reference must be to the detailed enumeration of вҖңthe powers requisite for the production of poetry,вҖқ and the subsequent antithesis of Imagination and Fancy contained in the Preface to the collected <i>Poems of William Wordsworth</i>, published in 1815. In the Preface to the <i>Excursion</i> (1814) it is expressly stated that вҖңit is not the authorвҖҷs intention formally to announce a system.вҖқ] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>WordsworthвҖҷs place may be in the CustomsвҒ вҖ”it is, I think, in that or the ExciseвҒ вҖ”besides another at Lord LonsdaleвҖҷs table, where this poetical charlatan and political parasite licks up the crumbs with a hardened alacrity; the converted Jacobin having long subsided into the clownish sycophant [<i>despised retainer</i>вҒ вҖ”<i>MS. erased</i>] of the worst prejudices of the aristocracy.</p>
					<p>[Wordsworth obtained his appointment as Distributor of Stamps for the county of Westmoreland in March, 1813, through Lord LonsdaleвҖҷs вҖңpatronageвҖқ (see his letter, March 6, 1813). <i>The Excursion</i> was dedicated to Lord Lonsdale in a sonnet dated July 29, 1814вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңOft through thy fair domains, illustrious Peer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In youth I roamedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now, by thy care befriended, I appear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Before thee, Lonsdale, and this Work present.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Paradise Lost</i>, vii. 25, 26.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңPale, but not cadaverous:вҖқвҒ вҖ”MiltonвҖҷs two elder daughters are said to have robbed him of his books, besides cheating and plaguing him in the economy of his house, etc., etc. His feelings on such an outrage, both as a parent and a scholar, must have been singularly painful. Hayley compares him to Lear. See part third, <i>Life of Milton</i>, by W. Hayley (or Hailey, as spelt in the edition before me).</p>
					<p>[<i>The Life of Milton</i>, by William Hailey (<i>sic</i>), Esq., Basil, 1799, p. 186.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>OrвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWould <i>he</i> subside into a hackney LaureateвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A scribbling, self-sold, soul-hired, scorned Iscariot?вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I doubt if вҖңLaureateвҖқ and вҖңIscariotвҖқ be good rhymes, but must say, as Ben Jonson did to Sylvester, who challenged him to rhyme withвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңI, John Sylvester,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lay with your sister.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Jonson answeredвҒ вҖ”вҖңI, Ben Jonson, lay with your wife.вҖқ Sylvester answeredвҒ вҖ”вҖңThat is not rhyme.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңNo,вҖқ said Ben Jonson; вҖңbut it is <i>true</i>.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[For Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, see <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 538, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 568, note 2; and <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 108, note 1.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the character of Eutropius, the eunuch and minister at the court of Arcadius, see Gibbon, [<i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, ii. 307, 308]. <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңMr.В John MurrayвҒ вҖ”As publisher to the Admiralty and of various Government works, if the five stanzas concerning Castlereagh should risk your ears or the Navy List, you may omit them in the publicationвҒ вҖ”in that case the two last lines of stanza 10 [<i>i.e</i>. 11] must end with the couplet (lines 7, 8) inscribed in the margin. The stanzas on Castlerighi (as the Italians call him) are 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>MS. M</i>.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Commenting on a вҖңpathetic sentimentвҖқ of Leoni, the author of the Italian translation of <i>Childe Harold</i> (вҖңSciagurata condizione di questa mia patria!вҖқ), Byron affirms that the Italians execrated Castlereagh вҖңas the cause, by the conduct of the English at Genoa.вҖқ вҖңSurely,вҖқ he exclaims, вҖңthat man will not die in his bed: there is no spot of the earth where his name is not a hissing and a curse. Imagine what must be the manвҖҷs talent for Odium, who has contrived to spread his infamy like a pestilence from Ireland to Italy, and to make his name an execration in all languages.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, May 8, 1820, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 22, note 1.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Charles James Fox and the Whig Club of his time adopted a uniform of blue and buff. Hence the livery of the <i>Edinburgh Review</i>.] <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I allude not to our friend LandorвҖҷs hero, the traitor Count Julian, but to GibbonвҖҷs hero, vulgarly yclept вҖңThe Apostate.вҖқ <a href="dedication.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 1-->
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Begun at Venice, September 6; finished November 1, 1818.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The pantomime which Byron and his readers вҖңall had seen,вҖқ was an abbreviated and bowdlerized version of ShadwellвҖҷs <i>Libertine</i>. вҖңFirst produced by Mr.В Garrick on the boards of Drury Lane Theatre,вҖқ it was recomposed by Charles Anthony Delpini, and performed at the Royalty Theatre, in GoodmanвҖҷs Fields, in 1787. It was entitled <i>Don Juan; or, The Libertine Destroyed</i>: A Tragic Pantomimical Entertainment, In Two Acts. Music Composed by Mr.В Gluck. вҖңScaramouch,вҖқ the вҖңSganarelleвҖқ of MoliГЁreвҖҷs <i>Festin de Pierre</i>, was a favourite character of Joseph Grimaldi. He was cast for the part, in 1801, at SadlerвҖҷs Wells, and, again, on a memorable occasion, November 28, 1809, at Covent Garden Theatre, when the O.P. riots were in full swing, and (see the <i>Morning Chronicle</i>, November 29, 1809) вҖңthere was considerable tumult in the pit.вҖқ According to вҖңBozвҖқ (<i>Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi</i>, 1846, ii. 81, 106, 107), Byron patronized GrimaldiвҖҷs вҖңbenefits at Covent Garden,вҖқ was repeatedly in his company, and when he left England, in 1816, вҖңpresented him with a valuable silver snuff-box.вҖқ At the end of the pantomime вҖңthe Furies gather round him [Don Juan], and the Tyrant being bound in chains is hurried away and thrown into flames.вҖқ The Devil is conspicuous by his absence.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Edward Vernon, Admiral (1684вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1757), took Porto Bello in 1739.</p>
					<p>William Augustus, second son of George II. (1721вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1765), fought at the battles of Dettingen, 1743; Fontenoy, 1745; and at Culloden, 1746. For the вҖңseverity of the Duke of Cumberland,вҖқ see ScottвҖҷs <i>Tales of a Grandfather</i>, <i>Prose Works</i>, 1830, vii. 852, <i>sq</i>.</p>
					<p>James Wolfe, General, born January 2, 1726, was killed at the siege of Quebec, September 13, 1759.</p>
					<p>Edward, Lord Hawke, Admiral (1715вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1781), totally defeated the French fleet in Quiberon Bay, November 20, 1759.</p>
					<p>Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick (1721вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1792), gained the victory at Minden, August 1, 1759.</p>
					<p>John Manners, Marquess of Granby (1721вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1790), commanded the British forces in Germany (1766вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1769).</p>
					<p>John Burgoyne, General, defeated the Americans at Germantown, October 3, 1777, but surrendered to General Gates at Saratoga, October 17, 1778. He died in 1792.</p>
					<p>Augustus, Viscount Keppel, Admiral (1725вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1786), was tried by court-martial, January-February, 1779, for allowing the French fleet off Ushant to escape, July, 1778. He was honourably acquitted.</p>
					<p>Richard, Earl Howe, Admiral (1725вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1799), known by the sailors as вҖңBlack Dick,вҖқ defeated the French off Ushant, June 1, 1794.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. i, line 65.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIn the eighth and concluding lecture of Mr.В HazlittвҖҷs canons of criticism, delivered at the Surrey Institution (<i>The English Poets</i>, 1870, pp. 203, 204), I am accused of having вҖҳlauded Buonaparte to the skies in the hour of his success, and then peevishly wreaking my disappointment on the god of my idolatry.вҖҷ The first lines I ever wrote upon Buonaparte were the вҖҳOde to Napoleon,вҖҷ after his abdication in 1814. All that I have ever written on that subject has been done since his decline;вҒ вҖ”I never вҖҳmet him in the hour of his success.вҖҷ I have considered his character at different periods, in its strength and in its weakness: by his zealots I am accused of injusticeвҒ вҖ”by his enemies as his warmest partisan, in many publications, both English and foreign.</p>
					<p>вҖңFor the accuracy of my delineation I have high authority. A year and some months ago, I had the pleasure of seeing at Venice my friend the honourable Douglas Kinnaird. In his way through Germany, he told me that he had been honoured with a presentation to, and some interviews with, one of the nearest family connections of Napoleon (EugГЁne Beauharnais). During one of these, he read and translated the lines alluding to Buonaparte, in the Third Canto of <i>Childe Harold</i>. He informed me, that he was authorized by the illustrious personageвҒ вҖ”(still recognized as such by the Legitimacy in Europe)вҒ вҖ”to whom they were read, to say, <i>that вҖҳthe delineation was complete,вҖҷ</i> or words to this effect. It is no puerile vanity which induces me to publish this fact;вҒ вҖ”but Mr.В Hazlitt accuses my inconsistency, and infers my inaccuracy. Perhaps he will admit that, with regard to the latter, one of the most intimate family connections of the Emperor may be equally capable of deciding on the subject. I tell Mr.В Hazlitt that I never flattered Napoleon on the throne, nor maligned him since his fall. I wrote what I think are the incredible antitheses of his character.</p>
					<p>вҖңMr.В Hazlitt accuses me further of delineating <i>myself</i> in <i>Childe Harold</i>, etc., etc. I have denied this long agoвҒ вҖ”but, even were it true, Locke tells us, that all his knowledge of human understanding was derived from studying his own mind. From Mr.В HazlittвҖҷs opinion of my poetry I do not appeal; but I request that gentleman not to insult me by imputing the basest of crimesвҒ вҖ”viz. вҖҳpraising publicly the same man whom I wished to depreciate in his adversity:вҖҷвҒ вҖ”the <i>first</i> lines I ever wrote on Buonaparte were in his dispraise, in 1814вҒ вҖ”the <i>last</i>, though not at all in his favour, were more impartial and discriminative, in 1818. Has he become more fortunate since 1814?вҖқ For ByronвҖҷs various estimates of NapoleonвҖҷs character and career, see <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto III, stanza xxxvi. line 7, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 238, note 1.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Charles FranГ§ois Duperier Dumouriez (1739вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823) defeated the Austrians at Jemappes, November 6, 1792, etc. He published his <i>MГ©moires</i> (Hamburg et Leipsic), 1794. For the spelling, see <i>Memoirs of General Dumourier</i>, written by himself, translated by John Fenwick. London, 1794. See, too, <i>Lettre de Joseph Servan</i>, Ex-ministre de la Guerre, <i>Sur le mГ©moire lu par M. Dumourier le 13 Juin Г  lвҖҷAssemblГ©e Nationale; BibiothГЁque Historique de la RГ©volution</i>, вҖңJustifications,вҖқ 7, 8, 9.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Antoine Pierre Joseph Barnave, born 1761, was appointed President of the Constituent Assembly in 1790. He was guillotined November 30, 1793.</p>
					<p>Jean Pierre Brissot de Warville, philosopher and politician, born January 14, 1754, was one of the principal instigators of the revolt of the Champ de Mars, July, 1789. He was guillotined October 31, 1793.</p>
					<p>Marie Jean Antoine, Marquis de Condorcet, born September 17, 1743, was appointed President of the Legislative Assembly in 1792. Proscribed by the Girondins, he poisoned himself to escape the guillotine, March 28, 1794.</p>
					<p>HonorГ© Gabriel Riquetti, Comte de Mirabeau, born March 9, 1749, died April 2, 1791.</p>
					<p>JГ©rГҙme Petion de Villeneuve, born 1753, Mayor of Paris in 1791, took an active part in the imprisonment of the king. In 1793 he fell under RobespierreвҖҷs displeasure, and to escape proscription took refuge in the department of Calvados. In 1794 his body was found in a field, half eaten by wolves.</p>
					<p>Jean Baptiste, Baron de Clootz (better known as Anacharsis Clootz), was born in 1755. In 1790, at the bar of the National Convention, he described himself as the вҖңSpeaker of Mankind.вҖқ Being suspected by Robespierre, he was condemned to death, March 24, 1794. On the scaffold he begged to be executed last, вҖңin order to establish certain principles.вҖқ (See CarlyleвҖҷs <i>French Revolution</i>, 1839, iii. 315.)</p>
					<p>Georges Jacques Danton, born October 28, 1759, helped to establish the Revolutionary Tribunal, March 10, and the Committee of Public Safety, April 6, 1793; agreed to proscription of the Girondists, June, 1793; was executed with Camille Desmoulins and others, April 5, 1794.</p>
					<p>Jean Paul Marat, born May 24, 1744, physician and man of science, proposed and carried out the wholesale massacre of September 2вҒ вҖ“вҒ 5, 1792; was denounced to, but acquitted by, the Revolutionary Tribunal, May, 1793; assassinated by Charlotte Corday, July 13, 1793.</p>
					<p>Marie Jean Paul, Marquis de La Fayette, born September 6, 1757, died May 19, 1834.</p>
					<p>With the exception of La Fayette, who outlived Byron by ten years, and Lord St.В Vincent, all вҖңthe famous personsвҖқ mentioned in stanzas ii.-iv. had passed away long before the First Canto of <i>Don Juan</i> was written.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[BarthГ©lemi Catherine Joubert, born April 14, 1769, distinguished himself at the engagements of Cava, Montebello, Rivoli, and in the Tyrol. He was afterwards sent to oppose SuvГіroff, and was killed at Novi, August 15, 1799.</p>
					<p>For Hoche and Marceau, <i>vide ante, Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 296.</p>
					<p>Jean Lannes, Duke of Montebello, born April 11, 1769, distinguished himself at Lodi, Aboukir, Acre, Austerlitz, Jena and, lastly, at Essling, where he was mortally wounded. He died May 31, 1809.</p>
					<p>Louis Charles Antoine Desaix de Voygoux, born August 27, 1768, won the victory at the Pyramids, July 21, 1798. He was mortally wounded at Marengo, June 14, 1800.</p>
					<p>Jean Victor Moreau, born August 11, 1763, was victorious at Engen, May 3, and at Hohenlinden, December 3, 1800. He was struck by a cannon-ball at the battle of Dresden, August 27, and died September 2, 1813.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Od.</i>, iv. c. ix. 1. 25вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңVixere fortes ante Agamemnona,вҖқ etc.]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Epist. Ad Pisones</i>, lines 148, 149вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңSemper ad eventum festinat, et in medias res,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Non secus ac notas, auditorem rapitвҒ вҖ”вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQuien no ha visto Sevilla, no ha visto maravilla.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his reply to <i>Blackwood</i> (No. xxix. August, 1819), Byron somewhat disingenuously rebuts the charge that <i>Don Juan</i> contained вҖңan elaborate satire on the character and manners of his wife.вҖқ вҖңIf,вҖқ he writes, вҖңin a poem by no means ascertained to be my production there appears a disagreeable, casuistical, and by no means respectable female pedant, it is set down for my wife. Is there any resemblance? If there be, it is in those who make itвҒ вҖ”I can see none.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letters, 1900, iv. 477. The allusions in stanzas xii.-xiv., and, again, in stanzas xxvii.-xxix., are, and must have been meant to be, unmistakable.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Gregor von Feinagle, born? 1765, was the inventor of a system of mnemonics, вҖңfounded on the topical memory of the ancients,вҖқ as described by Cicero and Quinctilian. He lectured, in 1811, at the Royal Institution and elsewhere. When Rogers was asked if he attended the lectures, he replied, вҖңNo; I wished to learn the Art of ForgettingвҖқ (<i>Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers</i>, 1856, p. 42).] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Little she spokeвҒ вҖ”but what she spoke was Attic all,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">With words and deeds in perfect unanimity.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sir Samuel Romilly, born 1757, lost his wife on the 29th of October, and committed suicide on the 2nd of November, 1818.вҒ вҖ”вҖңBut there will come a day of reckoning, even if I should not live to see it. I have at least seen Romilly shivered, who was one of the assassins. When that felon or lunaticвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ was doing his worst to uproot my whole family, tree, branch, and blossomsвҒ вҖ”when, after taking my retainer, he went over to them [see <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 324]вҒ вҖ”when he was bringing desolationвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ on my household godsвҒ вҖ”did he think that, in less than three years, a natural eventвҒ вҖ”a severe, domestic, but an unexpected and common calamityвҒ вҖ”would lay his carcase in a cross-road, or stamp his name in a verdict of Lunacy! Did he (who in his drivelling sexagenary dotage had not the courage to survive his NurseвҒ вҖ”for what else was a wife to him at his time of life?)вҒ вҖ”reflect or consider what <i>my</i> feelings must have been, when wife, and child, and sister, and name, and fame, and country, were to be my sacrifice on his legal altarвҒ вҖ”and this at a moment when my health was declining, my fortune embarrassed, and my mind had been shaken by many kinds of disappointmentвҒ вҖ”while I was yet young, and might have reformed what might be wrong in my conduct, and retrieved what was perplexing in my affairs! But the wretch is in his grave,вҖқ etc.-Letter to Murray, June 7, 1819, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 316.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Maria Edgeworth (1767вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1849) published <i>Castle Rackrent</i>, etc., etc., etc., in 1800. вҖңIn 1813,вҖқ says Byron, вҖңI recollect to have met them [the Edgeworths] in the fashionable world of London.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She was a nice little unassuming вҖҳJeannie Deans-looking body,вҖҷ as we Scotch say; and if not handsome, certainly not ill-lookingвҖқ (<i>Diary</i>, January 19, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 177вҒ вҖ“вҒ 179).] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sarah Trimmer (1741вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1810) published, in 1782, <i>Easy Introduction to the Study of Nature</i>; <i>History of the Robins</i> (dedicated to the Princess Sophia) in 1786, etc.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hannah More (1745вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1833) published <i>Coelebs in Search of a Wife</i> in 1809.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Pope, <i>Rape of the Lock</i>, Canto II, line 17.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[John Harrison (1693вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1776), known as вҖңLongitudeвҖқ Harrison, was the inventor of watch compensation. He received, in slowly and reluctantly paid instalments, a sum of ВЈ20,000 from the Government, for producing a chronometer which should determine the longitude within half a degree. A watch which contained his latest improvements was worn by Captain Cook during his three yearsвҖҷ circumnavigation of the globe.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңDescription des <i>vertus incomparables</i> de lвҖҷHuile de Macassar.вҖқ See the Advertisement. [<i>An Historical, Philosophical and Practical Essay on the Human Hair</i>, was published by Alexander Rowland, jun., in 1816. It was inscribed, вҖңTo her Royal Highness the Princess Charlotte of Wales and Cobourg.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Where all was innocence and quiet bliss.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And so she seemed, in all outside formalities.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңвҖҠвҖҳZounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him with his ladyвҖҷs fan.вҖқвҒ вҖ”I <i>Henry IV.</i>, act ii, sc 3, lines 19, 20.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Wishing each other damned, divorced, or dead.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[According to Medwin (<i>Conversations</i>, 1824, p. 55), Byron вҖңwas surprised one day by a Doctor and a Lawyer almost forcing themselves at the same time into my room. I did not know,вҖқ he adds, вҖңtill afterwards the real object of their visit. I thought their questions singular, frivolous, and somewhat importunate, if not impertinent: but what should I have thought, if I had known that they were sent to provide proofs of my insanity?вҖқ Lady Byron, in her <i>Remarks on Mr.В MooreвҖҷs Life, etc</i>. (<i>Life</i>, pp. 661вҒ вҖ“вҒ 663), says that Dr.В Baillie (<i>vide post</i>, <a>p. 412, note 2</a>), whom she consulted with regard to her husbandвҖҷs supposed insanity, вҖңnot having had access to Lord Byron, could not pronounce a positive opinion on this point.вҖқ It appears, however, that another doctor, a Mr.В Le Mann (see <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 293, note 1, 295, 299, etc.), visited Byron professionally, and reported on his condition to Lady Byron. Hence, perhaps, the mention of вҖңdruggists.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI deem it <i>my duty to God</i> to act as I am acting.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter of Lady Byron to Mrs.В Leigh, February 14, 1816, <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 311.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThis is so very pointed.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[?Hobhouse.] вҖңIf people make application, it is their own fault.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.].вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThere is some doubt about this.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.] вҖңWhat has the вҖҳdoubtвҖҷ to do with the poem? it is, at least, poetically true. Why apply everything to that absurd woman? I have no reference to living characters.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.].вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>] Medwin (<i>Conversations</i>, 1824, p. 54) attributes the вҖңbreaking open my writing-deskвҖқ to Mrs.В Charlment (i.e. Mrs.В Clermont) the original of вҖңA Sketch,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 540вҒ вҖ“вҒ 544. It is evident from ByronвҖҷs reply to HobhouseвҖҷs remonstrance that Medwin did not invent this incident, but that some one, perhaps FletcherвҖҷs wife, had told him that his papers had been overhauled.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>First their friends tried at reconciliation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The lawyers recommended a divorce.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He had been ill brought up, <span class="variant">besides was<br/>
							besides being</span> bilious.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The reason was, perhaps, that he was bilious.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And we may ownвҒ вҖ”since he is <span class="variant">now but<br/>
							laid in</span> earth.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI could have forgiven the dagger or the bowlвҒ вҖ”any thing but the deliberate desolation piled upon me, when I stood alone upon my hearth, with my household gods shivered around me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Do you suppose I have forgotten it? It has, comparatively swallowed up in me every other feeling, and I am only a spectator upon earth till a tenfold opportunity offers.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Moore, September 19, 1818, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv, 262, 263. Compare, tooвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңI had one only fount of quiet left,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And <i>that</i> they poisoned! My pure household gods</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Were shivered on my hearth, and oвҖҷer their shrine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sate grinning Ribaldry and sneering Scorn.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Marino Faliero</i>, act iii. sc. II, lines 361вҒ вҖ“вҒ 364.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Save death or <span class="variant">litigationвҒ вҖ”<br/>
							banishmentвҒ вҖ”</span> so he died.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare Leigh Hunt on the illustrations to Andrew TookeвҖҷs <i>Pantheon</i>: вҖңI see before me, as vividly now as ever, his Mars and ApolloвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and Venus very handsome, we thought, and not looking too modest in a вҖҳlight cymar.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Autobiography</i>, 1860, p. 75.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Defending still their Iliads and Odysseys.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Longinus, Section 10, вҖңбјҪОҪОұ ОјбҪҙ бј•ОҪ П„О№ ПҖОөПҒбҪ¶ ОұбҪҗП„бҪҙОҪ ПҖО¬ОёОҝПӮ ПҶОұОҜОҪО·П„ОұО№, ПҖОұОёбҝ¶ОҪ ОҙбҪІ ПғПҚОҪОҝОҙОҝПӮ.</p>
					<p>[вҖңThe effect desired is that not one passion only should be seen in her, but a concourse of passionsвҖқ (<i>Longinis on the Sublime</i>, by W. Rhys Roberts, 1899, pp. 70, 71).</p>
					<p>The Ode alluded to is the famous ОҰОұОҜОҪОөП„ОұОҜ ОјОҝО№ ОәбҝҶОҪОҝПӮ бјҙПғОҝПӮ ОёОөОҝбҝ–ПғО№ОҪ, Оә.П„.О».</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңHim rival to the gods I place;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Him loftier yet, if loftier be,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who, Lesbia, sits before thy face,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Who listens and who looks on thee.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>W.E. Gladstone.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>вҖңI do not think you are quite held out by the quotation. Longinus says the circumstantial assemblage of the passions makes the sublime; he does not talk of the sublime being soaring and ample.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.] вҖңI do not care for thisвҒ вҖ”it must stand.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.]вҒ вҖ”[<i>Marginal notes in Revise.</i>]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Bucol.</i>, Ecl. ii. вҖңAlexis.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Too much their <span class="variant">antique<br/>
							modest<br/>
							downright</span> bard by the <span class="variant">elision<br/>
							omission</span>.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fact! There is, or was, such an edition, with all the obnoxious epigrams of Martial placed by themselves at the end.</p>
					<p>[In the Delphin <i>Martial</i> (Amsterdam, 1701) the <i>Epigrammata Obscaena</i> are printed as an Appendix (pp. 2вҒ вҖ“вҒ 56), вҖң[Ne] quiequam desideraretur a morosis quibusdam hominibus.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See his <i>Confessions</i>, lib. i. cap. ix.; [lib. ii. cap. ii., <i>et passim</i>]. By the representation which Saint Augustine gives of himself in his youth, it is easy to see that he was what we should call a rake. He avoided the school as the plague; he loved nothing but gaming and public shows; he robbed his father of everything he could find; he invented a thousand lies to escape the rod, which they were obliged to make use of to punish his irregularities. <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[ByronвҖҷs early letters are full of complaints of his motherвҖҷs violent temper. See, for instance, letter to the Hon.В Augusta Byron, April 23, 1805. In another letter to John M.B. Pigot, August 9, 1806, he speaks of her as вҖңMrs.В Byron вҖҳ<i>furiosa</i>вҖҳвҖқ (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 60, 101).] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHaving surrendered the last symbol of power, the unfortunate Boabdil continued on towards the Alpuxarras, that he might not behold the entrance of the Christians into his capital.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Having ascended an eminence commanding the last view of Granada, the Moors paused involuntarily to take a farewell gaze at their beloved city, which a few steps more would shut from their sight for ever.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The heart of Boabdil, softened by misfortunes, and overcharged with grief, could no longer contain itself. вҖҳAllah achbar! God is great!вҖҷ said he; but the words of resignation died upon his lips, and he burst into a flood of tears.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada</i>, by Washington Irving, 1829, ii. 379вҒ вҖ“вҒ 381.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷll tell you a secretвҒ вҖ”<span class="variant">silence! hush!<br/>
							which youвҖҷll hush</span></span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Spouses from twenty years of age to thirty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are most admired by women of <span class="variant">strict<br/>
							staid</span> virtue.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the particulars of St.В AnthonyвҖҷs recipe for hot blood in cold weather, see Mr.В Alban ButlerвҖҷs <i>Lives of the Saints</i>.</p>
					<p>[вҖңI am not sure it was not St.В Francis who had the wife of snowвҒ вҖ”in that case the line must run, вҖҳSt.В Francis back to reason.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”[<i>MS. M.</i>]</p>
					<p>For the seven snow-balls, of which вҖңthe greatestвҖқ was his wife, see Life of вҖңSt.В Francis of AssisiвҖқ (<i>The Golden Legend</i> (edited by F.S. Ellis), 1900, v. 221). See, too, <i>the Lives of the Saints, etc.</i>, by the Rev. Alban Butler, 1838, ii. 574.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The sorceress in TassoвҖҷs <i>Gerusalemme Liberata</i>. The story of Armida and Rinaldo forms the plot of operas by GlГјck and Rossini.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Thinking God might not understand the case.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M., Revise.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңQuel giorno piГ№ non vi leggemmo avante.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Dante, <i>Inferno</i>, canto v. line 138.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">[вҖңConscienzia mвҖҷassicura,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>La buona compagnia che lвҖҷuom francheggia</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sotto lвҖҷosbergo del sentirsi pura.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Inferno</i>, canto xxviii, lines 115вҒ вҖ“вҒ 117.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Deemed that her thoughts no more required control.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See Ovid, <i>Metamorph</i>., vii. 9, sq.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>CampbellвҖҷs <i>Gertrude of Wyoming</i>вҒ вҖ”(I think)вҒ вҖ”the opening of Canto Second [Part III. stanza i. lines 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 4]вҒ вҖ”but quote from memory. <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Biographia Literaria</i>, chap. i. (ed. 1847, i. 14, 15); and <i>Dejection: An Ode</i>, lines 86вҒ вҖ“вҒ 93.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I say this by the wayвҒ вҖ”so donвҖҷt look stern.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But if youвҖҷre angry, reader, pass it by.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Juan Boscan, of Barcelona (1500вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1544), in concert with his friend Garcilasso, Italianized Castilian poetry. He was the author of the <i>Leandro</i>, a poem in blank verse, of canzoni, and sonnets after the model of Petrarch, and of <i>The Allegory</i>.вҒ вҖ”<i>History of Spanish Literature</i>, by George Ticknor, 1888, i. 513.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Garcias Lasso or Garcilasso de la Vega (1503вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1536), of a noble family at Toledo, was a warrior as well as a poet, вҖңnow seizing on the sword and now the pen.вҖқ After serving with distinction in Germany, Africa, and Provence, he was killed at Muy, near Frejus, in 1536, by a stone, thrown from a tower, which fell on his head as he was leading on his battalion. He was the author of thirty-seven sonnets, five canzoni, and three pastorals.вҒ вҖ”<i>Vide ibidem</i>, pp. 522вҒ вҖ“вҒ 535.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A real wittol always is suspicious,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But always also hunts in the wrong place.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Change horses every hour from night till noon.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Except the promises of true theology.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңOh, Susan! IвҖҷve said, in the moments of mirth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">WhatвҖҷs devotion to thee or to me?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I devoutly believe thereвҖҷs a heaven on earth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And believe that <i>that</i> heavenвҖҷs in <i>thee.</i>вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖңThe Catalogue,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works of the late Thomas Little</i>, 1803, p. 128.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>She stood on GuiltвҖҷs steep brink, in all the sense</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And full security of Innocence.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i>To leave these two young people then and there.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</i>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAge Xerxes.. eo usque luxuria gaudens, ut edicto prГҰmium ei proponeret, qui novum voluptatis genus reperisset.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Val. Max, <i>De Dictis, etc.</i>, lib. ix. cap. 1, ext. 3.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңYou certainly will be damned for all this scene.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza iii. line 2, <i>Poetical Works</i>, ii. 329, note 3.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Our coming, nor look brightly till we come.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Sweet is a lawsuit to the attorneyвҒ вҖ”sweet, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[So, too, Falstaff, <i>Henry IV.</i>, act ii. sc. 2, lines 79, 80.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">WhoвҖҷve made us waitвҒ вҖ”God knows how long already,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For an entailed estate, or country-seat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Wishing them not exactly damned, but deadвҒ вҖ”he</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Knows nought of grief, who has not so been worriedвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>вҖҳT is strange old people donвҖҷt like to be buried.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron has not been forgotten at Harrow, though it is a bend of the Cam (ByronвҖҷs Pool), not his favourite Duck Pool (now вҖңDuckerвҖқ) which bears his name.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reference is to the metallic tractors of Benjamin Charles Perkins, which were advertised as a вҖңcure for all disorders, Red Noses,вҖқ etc. Compare <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, lines 131, 132вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWhat varied wonders tempt us as they pass!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Cow-pox, Tractors, Galvanism, and Gas.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>See <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 307, note 3.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Edward Jenner (1749вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823) made his first experiments in vaccination, May 14, 1796. Napoleon caused his soldiers to be vaccinated, and imagined that the English would be gratified by his recognition of JennerвҖҷs discovery.</p>
					<p>Sir William Congreve (1772вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1828) invented вҖңCongreve rocketsвҖқ or shells in 1804. They were used with great effect at the battle of Leipzig, in 1813.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңMon cher ne touchez pas Г  la petite VГ©role.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.]вҒ вҖ”[Revise.]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Experiments in galvanism were made on the body of Forster the murderer, by GalvaniвҖҷs nephew, Professor Aldini, January and February, 1803.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңPut out these lines, and keep the others.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.]вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sir Humphry Davy, P.R.S. (1778вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1829), invented the safety-lamp in 1815.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In a critique of <i>An Account of the Empire of Marocco</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ <i>To which is added an</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ <i>account of Tombuctoo, the great Emporium of Central Africa,</i> by James Grey Jackson, London, 1809, the reviewer comments on the authorвҖҷs pedantry in correcting вҖңthe common orthography of African names.вҖқ вҖңWe do not,вҖқ he writes, вҖңgreatly object toвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ <i>Fas</i> for <i>Fez,</i> or even <i>Timbuctoo</i> for <i>Tombuctoo,</i> but <i>Marocco</i> for <i>Morocco</i> is a little too much.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, July, 1809В vol. xiv. p. 307.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sir John Ross (1777вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1856) published <i>A Voyage of Discovery</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ <i>for the purpose of Exploring BaffinвҖҷs Bay, etc.,</i> in 1819; Sir W.E. Parry (1790вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1855) published his <i>Journal of a Voyage of Discovery to the Arctic Regions between 4th April and 18th November</i>, 1818, in 1820.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Not only pleasureвҖҷs sin, but sinвҖҷs a pleasure.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And lose in shining snow their summits blue.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖҷTwas midnightвҒ вҖ”dark and sombre was the night, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And supper, punch, ghost-stories, and such chat.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңвҖҠвҖҳAll that, Egad,вҖҷ as Bayes saysвҖқ [in the Duke of BuckinghamвҖҷs play <i>The Rehearsal</i>].вҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, September 28, 1820, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 80.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLobster-sallad, <i>not</i> a lobster-salad. Have you been at a London <i>ball</i>, and not known a Lobster-<i>sallad?</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”[H.]вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>] ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTo-night, as Countess Guiccioli observed me poring over <i>Don Juan</i>, she stumbled by mere chance on the 137th stanza of the First Canto, and asked me what it meant. I told her, вҖҳNothingвҒ вҖ”but your husband is coming.вҖҷ As I said this in Italian with some emphasis, she started up in a fright, and said, <i>вҖҳOh, my God, is</i> he <i>coming?вҖҷ</i> thinking it was <i>her own</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ You may suppose we laughed when she found out the mistake. You will be amused, as I was;вҒ вҖ”it happened not three hours ago.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, November 8, 1819, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 374.</p>
					<p>It should be borne in mind that the loves of Juan and Julia, the irruption of Don Alfonso, etc., were rather of the nature of prophecy than of reminiscence. The First Canto had been completed before the Countess Guiccioli appeared on the scene.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And thus as вҖҷtwere herself from out them crept.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Ere I the wife of such a man had been!</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But while this search was making, JuliaвҖҷs tongue.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Spanish вҖңCortejoвҖқ is much the same as the Italian вҖңCavalier Servente.вҖқ <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Donna Julia here made a mistake. Count OвҖҷReilly did not take AlgiersвҒ вҖ”but Algiers very nearly took him: he and his army and fleet retreated with great loss, and not much credit, from before that city, in the year 1775.</p>
					<p>[Alexander OвҖҷReilly, born 1722, a Spanish general of Irish extraction, failed in an expedition against Algiers in 1775, in which the Spaniards lost four thousand men. In 1794 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the forces equipped against the army of the French National Convention. He died March 23, 1794.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Italian names have an obvious signification.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The chimneyвҒ вҖ”fit retreat for any lover!</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ may deplore.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [Alternative reading. MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThou speakest as one of the foolish women speakethвҖқ (<i>Job</i> ii. 10).] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңDonвҖҷt be read aloud.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.]вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ than be put</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To drown with Clarence in his Malmsey butt.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And reckon up our balance with the devil.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCarissimo, do review the whole scene, and think what you would say of it, if written by another.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.] вҖңI would say, read вҖҳThe MiracleвҖҷ [вҖҳA Tale from BoccaceвҖҷ] in HobhouseвҖҷs poems, and вҖҳJanuary and May,вҖҷ and вҖҳPaulo Purganti,вҖҷ and вҖҳHans Carvel,вҖҷ and вҖҳJoconde.вҖҷ <i>These</i> are laughable: it is the <i>serious</i>вҒ вҖ”LittleвҖҷs poems and <i>Lalla Rookh</i>вҒ вҖ”that affect seriously. Now Lust is a serious passion, and cannot be excited by the ludicrous.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.]вҒ вҖ”<i>Marginal Notes in Revise</i>.]</p>
					<p>For the вҖңMiracle,вҖқ see <i>Imitations and Translations</i>, 1809, pp. 111вҒ вҖ“вҒ 128. вҖңJanuary and MayвҖқ is PopeвҖҷs version of ChaucerвҖҷs <i>MerchantвҖҷs Tale</i>. вҖңPaulo PurgantiвҖқ and вҖңHans CarvelвҖқ are by Matthew Prior; and for вҖңJocondeвҖқ (<i>Nouvelle TirГ©e de LвҖҷAriosto</i>, canto xxviii.) see <i>Contes et Nouvelles en Vers</i>, de Mr.В de la Fontaine, 1691, i. 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 19.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare вҖңThe use made in the French tongue of the word <i>tact</i>, to denote that delicate sense of propriety, which enables a man to <i>feel his way</i> in the difficult intercourse of polished society, seems to have been suggested by similar considerations (i.e. similar to those which suggested the use of the word <i>taste</i>).вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Outlines of Moral Philosophy</i>, by Dugald Stewart, Part I. sect. x. ed. 1855, p. 48. For DвҖҷAlembertвҖҷs use of <i>tact</i>, to denote вҖңthat peculiar delicacy of perception (which, like the nice touch of a blind man) arises from habits of close attention to those slighter feelings which escape general notice,вҖқ see <i>Philosophical Essays</i>, by Dugald Stewart, 1818, p. 603.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With base suspicion now no longer haunted.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the incident of the shoes, Lord Byron was probably indebted to the Scottish balladвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңOur goodman came hame at eвҖҷen, and hame came he;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He spyвҖҷd a pair of jack-boots, where nae boots should be,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>WhatвҖҷs this now, goodwife? WhatвҖҷs this I see?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How came these boots there, without the leave oвҖҷ me!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i6">Boots! quoвҖҷ she:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i6">Ay, boots, quoвҖҷ he.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shame faвҖҷ your cuckold face, and ill mat ye see,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ItвҖҷs but a pair of water stoups the cooper sent to me,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>See James JohnsonвҖҷs <i>Musical Museum</i>, 1787, etc., v. 466.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>FoundвҒ вҖ”heaven knows howвҒ вҖ”his solitary way.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[William Brodie Gurney (1777вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1855), the son and grandson of eminent shorthand writers, вҖңreported the proceedings against the Duke of York in 1809, the trials of Lord Cochrane in 1814, and of Thistlewood in 1820, and the proceedings against Queen Caroline.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Dict. of Nat. Biog</i>., art. вҖңGurney.вҖқ] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңVenice, December 7, 1818.</p>
					<p>вҖңAfter <i>that stanza</i> in the first canto of <i>Don Juan</i> (sent by Lord Lauderdale) towards the <i>conclusion</i> of the cantoвҒ вҖ”I speak of the stanza whose two last lines areвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңвҖҠвҖҳThe best is that in short-hand taвҖҷen by Gurney,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who to Madrid on purpose made a journey,вҖҷ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>insert the following stanzas, вҖҳBut Donna Inez,вҖҷ etc.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.]</p>
					<p>The text is based on a second or revised copy of stanzas cxc.-cxcviii. Many of the corrections and emendations which were inserted in the first draft are omitted in the later and presumably improved version. ByronвҖҷs first intention was to insert seven stanzas after stanza clxxxix., descriptive and highly depreciatory of Brougham, but for reasons of вҖңfairnessвҖқ (<i>vide infra</i>) he changed his mind. The casual mention of вҖңblundering BroughamвҖқ in <i>English Bards, etc.</i> (line 524, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 338, note 2), is a proof that his suspicions were not aroused as to the authorship of the review of <i>Hours of Idleness</i> (<i>Edin. Rev.</i>, January, 1808), and it is certain that ByronвҖҷs animosity was due to the part played by Brougham at the time of the Separation. (In a letter to Byron, dated February 18, 1817, Murray speaks of a certain B. вҖңas your incessant persecutorвҒ вҖ”the source of all affected public opinion respecting you.вҖқ) The stanzas, with the accompanying notes, are not included in the editions of 1833 or 1837, and are now printed for the first time.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>I</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңвҖҠвҖҷTwas a fine cause for those in law delightingвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">вҖҷTis pity that they had no Brougham in Spain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Famous for always talking, and neвҖҷer fighting,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">For calling names, and taking them again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For blustering, bungling, trimming, wrangling, writing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Groping all paths to power, and all in vainвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Losing elections, character, and temper,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A foolish, clever, fellowвҒ вҖ”<i>Idem semper!</i></span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>II</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңBully in Senates, skulker in the Field,<a>[A]</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">The AdultererвҖҷs advocate when duly feed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The libellerвҖҷs gratis Counsel, dirty shield</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Which Law affords to many a dirty deed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A wondrous Warrior against those who yieldвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">A rod to Weakness, to the brave a reedвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The PeopleвҖҷs sycophant, the PrinceвҖҷs foe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And serving him the more by being so.</span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>III</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңTory by nurture, Whig by Circumstance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">A Democrat some once or twice a year,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>WheneвҖҷer it suits his purpose to advance</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">His vain ambition in its vague career:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sort of Orator by sufferance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Less for the comprehension than the ear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the arrogance of endless power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without the sense to keep it for an hour.</span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>IV</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңThe House-of-Commons Damocles of wordsвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Above him, hanging by a single hair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On each harangue depend some hostile Swords;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">And deems he that we <i>always</i> will forbear?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Although Defiance oft declined affords</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">A blotted shield no ShireвҖҷs true knight would wear:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thersites of the House. Parolles<a>[B]</a> of Law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The double Bobadill<a>[C]</a> takes Scorn for Awe.</span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>V</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңHow noble is his languageвҒ вҖ”never pertвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">How grand his sentiments which neвҖҷer run riot!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when he swore вҖҳby God heвҖҷd sell his shirt</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">To head the poll!вҖҷ I wonder who would buy it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The skin has passed through such a deal of dirt</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">In grovelling on to powerвҒ вҖ”such stains now dye itвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So black the long-worn LionвҖҷs hide in hue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>YouвҖҷd swear his very heart had sweated through.</span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>VI</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңPanting for powerвҒ вҖ”as harts for cooling streamsвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Yet half afraid to venture for the draught;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A go-between, yet blundering in extremes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">And tossed along the vessel fore and aft;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now shrinking back, now midst the first he seems,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Patriot by force, and courtisan<a>[D]</a> by craft;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quick without wit, and violent without strengthвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A disappointed Lawyer, at full length.</span>
							</p>
						</div>
						<div>
							<header>
								<p>VII</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>вҖңA strange example of the force of Law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">And hasty temper on a kindling mindвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are these the dreams his young Ambition saw?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">Poor fellow! he had better far been blind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>IвҖҷm sorry thus to probe a wound so rawвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">But, then, as Bard my duty to Mankind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For warning to the rest, compels these rapsвҒ вҖ”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As Geographers lay down a Shoal in Maps.вҖқ</span>
							</p>
						</div>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[<a>[A]</a> For BroughamвҖҷs Fabian tactics with regard to duelling, <i>vide post</i>, <a>Canto XIII. stanza lxxxiv</a>. line 1, <a>p. 506, note 1</a>.]</p>
					<p>[<a>[B]</a> <i>Vide post</i>, <a>Canto XIII. stanza lxxxiv</a>. line 1, <a>p. 506, note 1</a>.]</p>
					<p>[<a>[C]</a> For вҖңCaptain Bobadill, a PaulвҖҷs man,вҖқ see Ben JonsonвҖҷs <i>Every Man in his Humour</i>, act iv. sc. 5, <i>et passim</i>.]</p>
					<p>[<a>[D]</a> The <i>N. Eng. Dict.</i>, quotes a passage in <i>Phil. Trans.</i>, iv. 286 (1669), as the latest instance of вҖңcourtisanвҖқ for вҖңcourtier.вҖқ]</p>
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p>Note to the Annexed Stanzas on Brougham.</p>
						</header>
						<p>вҖңDistrusted by the Democracy, disliked by the Whigs, and detested by the Tories, too much of a lawyer for the people, and too much of a demagogue for Parliament, a contestor of counties, and a Candidate for cities, the refuse of half the Electors of England, and representative at last upon sufferance of the proprietor of some rotten borough, which it would have been more independent to have purchased, a speaker upon all questions, and the outcast of all parties, his support has become alike formidable to all his enemies (for he has no friends), and his vote can be only valuable when accompanied by his Silence. A disappointed man with a bad temper, he is endowed with considerable but not first-rate abilities, and has blundered on through life, remarkable only for a fluency, in which he has many rivals at the bar and in the Senate, and an eloquence in which he has several Superiors. вҖҳWilling to wound and <i>not</i> afraid to strike, until he receives a blow in return, he has not yet betrayed any illegal ardour, or Irish alacrity, in accepting the defiances, and resenting the disgraceful terms which his proneness to evil-speaking have (sic) brought upon him. In the cases of Mackinnon and Manners,<a>[E]</a> he sheltered himself behind those parliamentary privileges, which Fox, Pitt, Canning, Castlereagh, Tierney, Adam, Shelburne, Grattan, Corry, Curran, and Clare disdained to adopt as their buckler. The House of Commons became the Asylum of his Slander, as the Churches of Rome were once the Sanctuary of Assassins.</p>
						<p>вҖңHis literary reputation (with the exception of one work of his early career) rests upon some anonymous articles imputed to him in a celebrated periodical work; but even these are surpassed by the Essays of others in the same Journal. He has tried every thing and succeeded in nothing; and he may perhaps finish as a Lawyer without practice, as he has already been occasionally an orator without an audience, if not soon cut short in his career.</p>
						<p>вҖңThe above character is <i>not</i> written impartially, but by one who has had occasion to know some of the baser parts of it, and regards him accordingly with shuddering abhorrence, and just so much fear as he deserves. In him is to be dreaded the crawling of the centipede, not the spring of the tigerвҒ вҖ”the venom of the reptile, not the strength of the animalвҒ вҖ”the rancour of the miscreant, not the courage of the Man.</p>
						<p>вҖңIn case the prose or verse of the above should be actionable, I put my name, that the man may rather proceed against me than the publisherвҒ вҖ”not without some faint hope that the brand with which I blast him may induce him, however reluctantly, to a manlier revenge.вҖқ</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p>Extract from Letter to Murray.</p>
						</header>
						<p>вҖңI enclose you the stanzas which were intended for 1st Canto, after the line</p>
						<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>вҖҳWho to Madrid on purpose made a journey:вҖҷ</span>
							</p>
						</blockquote>
						<p>but I do not mean them for present publication, because I will not, at this distance, publish <i>that</i> of a Man, for which he has a claim upon another too remote to give him redress.</p>
						<p>вҖңWith regard to the Miscreant Brougham, however, it was only long after the fact, and I was made acquainted with the language he had held of me on my leaving England (with regard to the D<sup>ss</sup> of D.вҖҷs house),<a>[F]</a> and his letter to Me. de StaГ«l, and various matters for all of which the first time he and I foregatherвҒ вҖ”be it in England, be it on earthвҒ вҖ”he shall account, and one of the two be carried home.</p>
						<p>вҖңAs I have no wish to have mysteries, I merely prohibit the <i>publication</i> of these stanzas in <i>print</i>, for the reasons of fairness mentioned; but I by no means wish <i>him not</i> to <i>know</i> their existence or their tenor, nor my intentions as to himself: he has shown no forbearance, and he shall find none. You may show them to <i>him</i> and to all whom it may concern, with the explanation that the only reason that I have not had satisfaction of this man has been, that I have never had an opportunity since I was aware of the facts, which my friends had carefully concealed from me; and it was only by slow degrees, and by piecemeal, that I got at them. I have not sought him, nor gone out of my way for him; but I will <i>find</i> him, and then we can have it out: he has shown so little courage, that he <i>must</i> fight at last in his absolute necessity to escape utter degradation.</p>
						<p>вҖңI send you the stanzas, which (except the last) have been written nearly two years, merely because I have been lately copying out most of the MSS. which were in my drawers.вҖқ</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><a>[E]</a> [Possibly George Manners (1778вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1853), editor of <i>The Satirist</i>, whose appointment to a foreign consulate Brougham sharply criticized in the House of Commons, July 9, 1817 (<i>Parl. Deb.</i>, vol. xxxvi. pp. 1320, 1321); and Daniel Mackinnon (1791вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1836), the nephew of Henry Mackinnon, who fell at Ciudad Rodrigo. Byron met вҖңDanвҖқ Mackinnon at Lisbon in 1809, and (Gronow, <i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, ii. 259, 260) was amused by his вҖңvarious funny stories.вҖқ]</p>
					<p><a>[F]</a> [ByronвҖҷs town-house, in 1815вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1816, No.В 13, Piccadilly, belonged to the Duchess of Devonshire. When he went abroad in April, 1816, the rent was still unpaid. The duchess, through her agent, distrained, but was unable to recover the debt. See ByronвҖҷs вҖңLetter to Elizabeth, Duchess of Devonshire,вҖқ November 3, 1817, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 178.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Julia was sent into a nunnery,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And there, perhaps, her feelings may be better.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>ManвҖҷs love is of his lifeвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQue les hommes sont heureux dвҖҷaller Г  la guerre, dвҖҷexposer leur vie, de se livrer Г  lвҖҷenthousiasme de lвҖҷhonneur et du danger! Mais il nвҖҷy a rien au-dehors qui soulage les femmes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Corinne, ou LвҖҷItalie</i>, Madame de StaГ«l, liv., xviii. chap. v. ed. 1835, iii. 209.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To mourn alone the love which has undone.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To lift our fatal love to God from man.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Take that which, of these three, seems the best prescription.вҒ вҖ”B. <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>You will proceed in beauty and in pride,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">You will returnвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That word is <span class="variant">fatal now<br/>
							lost for me<br/>
							deadly now</span>вҒ вҖ”but let it go.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I struggle, but can not collect my mind.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As turns the needle trembling to the pole</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It neвҖҷer can reachвҒ вҖ”so turns to you my soul.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With a neat crow-quill, rather hard, but new.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron had a seal bearing this motto.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">And there are other incidents remaining</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which shall be specified in fitting time,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With good discretion, and in current rhyme.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To newspapers, to sermons, which the zeal</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of pious men have published on his acts.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷll call the work вҖңReflections oвҖҷer a Bottle.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Here, and elsewhere in <i>Don Juan</i>, Byron attacked Coleridge fiercely and venomously, because he believed that his <i>protГ©gГ©</i> had accepted patronage and money, and, notwithstanding, had retailed scandalous statements to the detriment and dishonour of his advocate and benefactor (see letter to Murray, November 24, 1818, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 272; and вҖңIntroduction to the <i>Vision of Judgment,вҖқ Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 475). Byron does not substantiate his charge of ingratitude, and there is nothing to show whether Coleridge ever knew why a once friendly countenance was changed towards him. He might have asked, with the Courtenays, <i>Ubi lapsus, quid feci?</i> If Byron had been on his mind or his conscience he would have drawn up an elaborate explanation or apology; but nothing of the kind is extant. He took the abuse as he had taken the favoursвҒ вҖ”for the unmerited gifts of the blind goddess Fortune. (See, too, <i>Letter</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖҠ, by John Bull, 1821, p. 14.)] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare ByronвҖҷs вҖңLetter to the Editor of My GrandmotherвҖҷs Review,вҖқ <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. Appendix VII. 465вҒ вҖ“вҒ 470; and letter to Murray, August 24, 1819, ibid., p. 348: вҖңI wrote to you by last post, enclosing a buffooning letter for publication, addressed to the buffoon Roberts, who has thought proper to tie a canister to his own tail. It was written off-hand, and in the midst of circumstances not very favourable to facetiousness, so that there may, perhaps, be more bitterness than enough for that sort of small acid punch.вҖқ The letter was in reply to a criticism of <i>Don Juan</i> (Cantos I., II.) in the <i>British Review</i> (No. xxvii., 1819, vol. 14, pp. 266вҒ вҖ“вҒ 268), in which the Editor assumed, or feigned to assume, that the accusation of bribery was to be taken <i>au grand sГ©rieux</i>.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Od.</i> III. C. xiv. lines 27, 28.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I thought of dyeing it the other day.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto III. stanza cvii. line 2.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңMe nec femina, nec puer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Jam, nec spes animi credula mutui,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Nec certare juvat mero;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nec vincire novis tempora floribus.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Hor., <i>Od.</i> IV. i. 30.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[In the revise the words <i>nec puer Jam</i> were omitted. On this Hobhouse comments, вҖңBetter add the whole or scratch out all after femina.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңQuote the whole thenвҒ вҖ”it was only in compliance with your <i>settentrionale</i> notions that I left out the remnant of the line.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңHow Fryer Bacon made a Brazen head to speak,вҖқ see <i>The Famous Historie of Fryer Bacon</i> (Reprint, London, 1815, pp. 13вҒ вҖ“вҒ 18); see, too, <i>Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay</i>, by Robert Greene, ed. Rev. Alexander Dyce, 1861, pp. 153вҒ вҖ“вҒ 181.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңAh! who can tell how hard it is to climb</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The steep where FameвҖҷs proud temple shines afar?вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>BeattieвҖҷs <i>Minstrel</i>, Bk. I. stanza i. lines 1, 2.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A bookвҒ вҖ”a damned bad pictureвҒ вҖ”and worse bust.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[вҖңDonвҖҷt swear againвҒ вҖ”the third вҖҳdamn.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”[H.]вҒ вҖ”[<i>Revise.</i>]] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron sat for his bust to Thorwaldsen, in May, 1817.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[This stanza appears to have been suggested by the following passage in the <i>Quarterly Review</i>, April, 1818, vol. xix. p. 203: вҖң[It was] the opinion of the Egyptians, that the soul never deserted the body while the latter continued in a perfect state. To secure this union, King Cheops is said, by Herodotus, to have employed three hundred and sixty thousand of his subjects for twenty years in raising over the вҖҳangusta domusвҖҷ destined to hold his remains, a pile of stone equal in weight to six millions of tons, which is just three times that of the vast Breakwater thrown across Plymouth Sound; and, to render this precious dust still more secure, the narrow chamber was made accessible only by small, intricate passages, obstructed by stones of an enormous weight, and so carefully closed externally as not to be perceptible.вҒ вҖ”Yet, how vain are all the precautions of man! Not a bone was left of Cheops, either in the stone coffin, or in the vault, when Shaw entered the gloomy chamber.] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Must bid you both farewell in accents bland.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lines 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 4 are taken from the last stanza of the <i>Epilogue to the Lay of the Laureate</i>, entitled вҖңLвҖҷEnvoy.вҖқ (See <i>Poetical Works</i> of Robert Southey, 1838, x. 174.)] <a href="canto-1.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 2-->
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Begun at Venice, December 13, 1818,-finished January 20, 1819. <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Lost that most precious stone of stonesвҒ вҖ”his modesty.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare вҖңThe Girl of Cadiz,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 1, and note 1. <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But dвҒ вёәвҒ n me if I ever saw the like.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Fazzioli</i>вҒ вҖ”literally, little handkerchiefsвҒ вҖ”the veils most availing of St.В Mark.</p>
					<p>[вҖң<i>I fazzioli</i>, or kerchiefs (a white kind of veil which the lower orders wear upon their heads).вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Rogers, March 3, 1818, <i>Letters,</i> 1900, iv. 208.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Their manners mending, and their morals curing.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She taught them to suppress their viceвҒ вҖ”and urine.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңAnd fast the white rocks faded from his view</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="elision">вӢ®</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then, it may be, of his wish to roam</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Repented he.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. stanza xii. lines 3вҒ вҖ“вҒ 6, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 24.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTo breathe a veinвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to lance it so as to let blood.вҖқ CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote>
						<table epub:type="z3998:drama">
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosalind</td>
									<td>Is the fool sick?</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
									<td>Sick at heart.</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ros</td>
									<td>Alack, let it blood.вҖқ</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
						<cite><i>LoveвҖҷs LabourвҖҷs Lost</i>, act ii. sc. I, line 185.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Sea-sickness death; then pardon JuanвҒ вҖ”how else</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Keep down his stomach neвҖҷer at sea before?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWith regard to the charges about the Shipwreck, I think that I told you and Mr.В Hobhouse, years ago, that there was not a <i>single circumstance</i> of it <i>not</i> taken from <i>fact</i>: not, indeed, from any <i>single</i> shipwreck, but all from <i>actual</i> facts of different wrecks.вҖқвҒ вҖ” Letter to Murray, August 23, 1821. In the <i>Monthly Magazine</i>, vol. liii. (August, 1821, pp. 19вҒ вҖ“вҒ 22, and September, 1821, pp. 105вҒ вҖ“вҒ 109), ByronвҖҷs indebtedness to Sir G. DalzellвҖҷs <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i> (1812, 8vo) is pointed out, and the parallel passages are printed in full.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңNight came on worse than the day had been; and a <i>sudden shift of wind,</i> about midnight, <i>threw the ship into the trough of the sea, which struck her aft, tore away the rudder, started the stern-post, and shattered the whole of her stern-frame. The pumps</i> were <i>immediately sounded,</i> and in the course of a few minutes the water had increased to <i>four feet</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p><i>вҖңOne gang was instantly put on them, and the remainder of the people employed in getting up</i> rice from the run of the ship, and heaving it over, <i>to come at the leak,</i> if possible. After three or four hundred bags were thrown into the sea, <i>we did get at it,</i> and found <i>the water rushing</i> into the ship with astonishing rapidity; therefore we <i>thrust sheets, shirts, jackets, tales of muslin,</i> and everything of the like description that could be got, <i>into the opening.</i></p>
					<p>вҖңNotwithstanding the pumps <i>discharged fifty tons of water an hour,</i> the ship certainly <i>must have gone down,</i> had not our <i>expedients</i> been attended with some success. <i>The pumps,</i> to the excellent construction of which I owe the preservation of my life, <i>were made by Mr.В Mann of London. As the next day advanced, the weather appeared to moderate,</i> the men continued incessantly at the pumps, and every exertion was made to <i>keep the ship afloat.</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”See вҖңLoss of the American ship <i>Hercules,</i> Captain Benjamin Stout, June 16, 1796,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea,</i> 1812, iii. 316, 317.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңScarce was this done, when <i>a gust, exceeding in violence everything of the kind I had ever seen, or could conceive, laid the ship on her beam ends</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖңThe ship <i>lay motionless</i>, and, to all appearance, irrevocably overset.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ <i>The water forsook the hold</i>, and appeared between decks.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖңImmediate directions were given <i>to cut away the main and mizen masts</i>, trusting when the ship righted, to be able to wear her. On cutting one or two lanyards, the <i>mizen-mast went first over</i>, but without producing the smallest effect on the ship, and, on cutting the lanyard of one shroud, the <i>main-mast followed</i>. I had next the mortification to see the <i>foremast and bowsprit also go over</i>. On this, <i>the ship immediately righted with great violence</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i> Man-of-War, 1782, by Captain Inglefield,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 41.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Perhaps the whole would have got drunk, but for.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңA midshipman was appointed to guard the spirit-room, to repress that unhappy desire of a devoted crew <i>to die in a state of intoxication.</i> The sailors, though in other respects orderly in conduct, here pressed eagerly upon him.</p>
					<p>вҖң<i>вҖҳGive us some grog,вҖҷ</i> they exclaimed, <i>вҖҳit will be all one an hour hence.вҖҷвҒ вҖ”вҖҳI know we must die,вҖҷ</i> replied the gallant officer, coolly, <i>вҖҳbut let us die like men!</i>вҖҳвҒ вҖ”<i>Armed with a brace of pistols</i>, he kept his post, even while the ship was sinking.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Earl of Abergavenny,</i> February 5, 1805,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 418. John Wordsworth, the poetвҖҷs brother, was captain of the <i>Abergavenny</i>. See <i>Life of William Wordsworth</i>, by Professor Knight, 1889, i. 370вҒ вҖ“вҒ 380; see, too, ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Anima PoetГҰ</i>, 1895, p. 132. For a contemporary report, see a Maltese paper, <i>Il Cartaginense</i>, April 17, 1805.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHowever, by great exertions of the chain-pumps, we <i>held our own</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ All who were not seamen by profession, had been employed in <i>thrumming a sail which was passed under the shipвҖҷs bottom, and I thought</i> had some effect.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖң<i>The Centaur laboured so much</i>, that I <i>could scarce hope she would swim</i> till morning:вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ our sufferings <i>for want of water</i> were very great.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖң<i>The weather again threatened</i>, and by noon <i>it blew a storm</i>. The ship laboured greatly; <i>the water appeared in the fore and after-hold</i>. I was informed by the carpenter also that <i>the leathers</i> were nearly consumed, and the <i>chains of the pumps</i>, by constant exertion, and friction of the coils, were rendered almost useless.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖңAt this period the carpenter acquainted me that the well was stove inвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and the chain-pumps displaced and totally useless.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Seeing their efforts useless, many of them [the people] burst into tears, and wept like children.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
					<p>вҖңI perceived <i>the ship settling by the head.</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i>,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. pp. 45вҒ вҖ“вҒ 49.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖҳT is ugly dying in the Gulf of Lyons.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron may have had in mind the story of the half-inaudible vow of a monster wax candle, to be offered to St.В Christopher of Paris, which Erasmus tells in his <i>Naufragium</i>. The passage is scored with a pencil-mark in his copy of the <i>Colloquies</i>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanza xliv. recalls Cardinal de RetzвҖҷs description of the storm at sea in the Gulf of Lyons: вҖңEverybody were at their prayers, or were confessing themselves.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The private captain of the galley caused, in the greatest height of the danger, <i>his embroidered coat and his red scarf</i> to be brought to him, saying, that a true Spaniard ought to die bearing his KingвҖҷs Marks of distinction. He sat himself down in a great elbow chair, and with his foot struck a poor Neapolitan in the chops, who, not being able to stand upon the Coursey of the Galley, was crawling along, crying out aloud, <i>вҖҳSennor Don Fernando, por lвҖҷamor de Dios, Confession.вҖҷ</i> The captain, when he struck him, said to him, <i>вҖҳInimigo de Dios piedes Confession!вҖҷ</i> And as I was representing to him, that his inference was not right, he said that that old man gave offence to the whole galley. You canвҖҷt imagine the horror of a great storm; you can as little imagine the Ridicule mixed with it. A Sicilian Observantine monk was preaching at the foot of the great mast, that St.В Francis had appeared to him, and had assured him that we should not perish. I should never have done, should I undertake to describe all the ridiculous frights that are seen on these occasions.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Memoirs of Cardinal de Retz</i>, 1723, iii. 353.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңSome appeared perfectly resigned, <i>went to their hammocks,</i> and desired their messmates <i>to lash them in</i>; others were securing themselves to gratings and small rafts; but the most predominant idea was that <i>of putting on their best</i> and <i>cleanest clothes</i>. The boatsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ were got over the side.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i>,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 49, 50.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Men will prove hungry, even when next perdition.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңEight bags of rice, <i>six casks of water</i>, and a <i>small quantity of salted beef and pork</i>, were put into the long-boat, as provisions for the whole.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңWreck of the <i>Sidney</i>, 1806,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 434.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe <i>yawl was stove</i> alongside and sunk.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i>,вҖқ <i>ibid.</i>, iii. 50.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>One oar</i> was erected for a <i>main-mast</i>, and the other broke to the breadth of the <i>blankets for a yard</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Duke William</i> Transport, 1758,вҖқ <i>ibid</i>., ii. 387.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which being withdrawn, discloses but the frown.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of one who hates us, so the night was shown</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And grimly darkled oвҖҷer their faces pale,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And hopeless eyes, which oвҖҷer the deep alone</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Gazed dim and desolateвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAs <i>rafts</i> had been mentioned by the carpenter, I thought it right <i>to make the attempt</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It was impossible for any man to deceive himself with the hopes of being saved on a raft in such a sea.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i>,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 50. 51.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>Spars, booms, hencoops</i>, and <i>every thing</i> buoyant, was therefore <i>cast loose</i>, that the men might have some chance to save themselves.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Pandora</i>,вҖқ ibid., iii. 197.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe had scarce quitted the ship, when she gave a heavy <i>lurch to port</i>, and <i>then went down, head foremost.</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Lady Hobart</i>,вҖқ ibid., iii. 378.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAt this moment, one of the officers told the captain that she was going downвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and bidding him farewell, leapt overboard:вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the crew had just time to <i>leap overboard</i>, which they did, uttering <i>a most dreadful yell</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Pandora</i>,вҖқ ibid., iii. 198.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe boat, being fastened to the rigging, was no sooner cleared of the greatest part of the water, than a dog of mine came to me running along the gunwale. <i>I took him in</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңShipwreck of the Sloop <i>Betsy</i>, on the Coast of Dutch Guiana, August 5, 1756 (Philip Aubin, Commander),вҖқ <i>Remarkable Shipwrecks</i>, Hartford, 1813, p. 175.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Qy. вҖңMy good Sir! when the sea runs very high this is the case, as <i>I know</i>, but if <i>my authority</i> is not enough, see BlighвҖҷs account of his run to Timor, after being cut adrift by the mutineers headed by Christian.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[B.]</p>
					<p>вҖңPray tell me who was the Lubber who put the query? surely not <i>you</i>, Hobhouse! We have both of us seen too much of the sea for that. You may rely on my using no nautical word not founded on authority, and no circumstances not grounded in reality.вҖқ] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIt blew a violent storm, and the sea ran very high, so that between the seas the sail was becalmed; and when <i>on the top of the sea, it was too much to have set</i>, but I was obliged to carry it, for we were now in very imminent danger and distress; <i>the sea curling over the stern</i> of the boat, which obliged us <i>to bale with all our might</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>A Narrative of the Mutiny of the Bounty</i>, by William Bligh, 1790, p. 23.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңBefore it was dark, <i>a blanket</i> was discovered in the boat. This was immediately bent to one of the stretchers, and under it, <i>as a sail</i>, we scudded all night, in expectation of being <i>swallowed up by every wave.</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur</i>,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 52.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>The sun rose very fiery and red, a sure indication of a severe gale of wind</i>.вҒ вҖ”We could do nothing more than keep before the sea.вҒ вҖ”<i>I now served a tea-spoonful of rum to each person</i>,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ with a quarter of a bread-fruit, which was scarce eatable, for dinner.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>A Narrative, etc.</i>, by W. Bligh, 1790, pp. 23, 24.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң[As] our lodgings were very miserable and confined, I had only in my power to remedy the latter defect, by putting ourselves <i>at watch and watch</i>; so that <i>one half</i> always sat up, while the other half <i>lay down</i> on the boatвҖҷs bottom, with <i>nothing to cover us but the heavens.вҖқвҒ вҖ”A Narrative of the Mutiny of the Bounty</i>, by William Bligh, 1790, p. 28.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For ByronвҖҷs debts to Mrs.В Massingberd, вҖңJewвҖқ King, etc., and for money raised on annuities, see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 174, note 2, and letter to Hanson, December 11, 1817, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 187, вҖңThe list of annuities sent by Mr.В Kinnaird, including Jews and Sawbridge, amounts to twelve thousand eight hundred and some odd pounds.вҖқ] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe third day we began to suffer exceedinglyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ from hunger and thirst. I then seized my dog, and plunged the knife in his throat. We caught his blood in the hat, receiving in our hands and drinking what ran over; we afterwards drank in turn out of the hat, and felt ourselves refreshed.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңShipwreck of the <i>Betsy</i>,вҖқ <i>Remarkable Shipwrecks</i>, Hartford, 1813, p. 177.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOne day, when I was at home in my hut with my Indian dog, a party came to my door, and told me their necessities were such that they must eat the creature or starve. Though their plea was urgent, I could not help using some arguments to endeavour to dissuade them from killing him, as his faithful services and fondness deserved it at my hands; but, without weighing my arguments, they took him away by force and killed him.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Three weeks after that I was glad to make a meal of his paws and skin which, upon recollecting the spot where they had killed him, I found thrown aside and rotten.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>The Narrative of the Honourable John Byron, etc.</i>, 1768, pp. 47, 48.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Being driven to distress for want of food, вҖңthey <i>soaked their shoes</i>, and two <i>hairy caps</i> in water; and when sufficiently softened ate portions of the leather.вҖқ But day after day having passed, and the cravings of hunger pressing hard upon them, they fell upon the horrible and dreadful expedient of eating each other; and in order to prevent any contention about who should become the food of the others, вҖңthey cast lots to determine the sufferer.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңSufferings of the Crew of the <i>Thomas</i> [Twelve Men in an Open Boat, 1797],вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii 356.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>The lots were drawn</i>: вҖҳthe captain, summoning all his strength, wrote upon slips of paper the name of each man, folded them up, put them into a hat, and shook them together. The crew, meanwhile, preserved <i>an awful silence</i>; each eye was fixed and each mouth open, while terror was strongly impressed upon every countenance.вҖҷ The unhappy person, with manly fortitude, resigned himself to his miserable associates.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңFamine in the American Ship <i>Peggy</i>, 1765,вҖқ <i>Remarkable Shipwrecks</i>, Hartford, 1813, pp. 358, 359.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>He requested to be bled to death, the surgeon</i> being with them, and having <i>his case of instruments</i> in his pocket when he quitted the vessel.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңSufferings of the Crew of the <i>Thomas,вҖқ Shipwrecks, etc.</i>, 1812, iii. 357.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңYet scarce was the vein divided when the operator, applying his own parched lips, <i>drank the stream as it flowed</i>, and his comrades anxiously watched the last breath of the victim, that they might prey upon his flesh.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 357.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThose who indulged their cannibal appetite to excess speedily perished in <i>raging madness</i>,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid</i>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAnother expedient we had frequent recourse to, on finding it supplied our mouths with temporary moisture, was <i>chewing</i> any substance we could find, generally a bit of canvas, or even <i>lead</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңThe Shipwreck of the <i>Juno</i> on the Coast of Aracan,вҖқ 1795, <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 270.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAt noon, some noddies came so near to us that one of them was caught by hand.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I divided it into eighteen portions. In the evening we saw several <i>boobies</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>A Narrative of the Mutiny of the Bounty</i>, by William Bligh, 1790, p. 41.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңQuandвҖҷ ebbe detto ciГІ, con gli occhi torti</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Riprese il teschio misero coi denti,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Che furo allвҖҷ osso, come dвҖҷun can forti.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Dante, <i>Inferno</i>, canto xxxiii. lines 76вҒ вҖ“вҒ 78.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWhenever a heavy shower afforded us a few mouthfuls of fresh water, either by catching the drops as they fell or by squeezing them out of our clothes, it infused new life and vigour into us, and for a while we had almost forgot our misery.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 270. Compare <i>The Island</i>, Canto I. stanza ix. lines 193, 194, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 595.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWith throats unslaked, with black lips baked.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Ancient Mariner</i>, Part III. line 157.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңMr.В WadeвҖҷs boy, a <i>stout healthy lad, died early</i>, and almost without a groan; while another, of the same age, but of a less promising appearance, held out much longer. Their fathers were both in the fore-top, when the boys were taken ill. [Wade], hearing of his sonвҖҷs illness, answered, with indifference, that <i>he could do nothing for him</i>, and left him to his fate.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңNarrative of the Shipwreck of the <i>Juno</i>, 1795,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 273.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>The other [Father]</i> hurried down.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ By that time only three or four planks of the quarter-deck remained, just over the quarter gallery. To this spot the unhappy man led his son, making him fast to the rail, to prevent his being washed away.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid</i>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWhenever the <i>boy was seized</i> with a fit of retching, the father lifted him up and <i>wiped away the foam from his lips</i>; and if a <i>shower came</i>, he made him open his mouth to <i>receive the drops</i>, or gently <i>squeezed them into it from a rag.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Ibid</i>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIn this affecting situation both remained four or five days, till <i>the boy expired</i>. The unfortunate parent, as if unwilling to believe the fact, raised the body, looked <i>wistfully</i> at it, and when he could no <i>longer entertain any doubt</i>, watched it in silence <i>until</i> it was carried <i>off by sea</i>; then wrapping himself in a piece of canvas, <i>sunk down</i>, and rose no more; though he must have lived two days longer, as we judged from the <i>quivering of his limbs</i> when a wave broke over him.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңNarrative of the Shipwreck of the <i>Juno</i>, 1795,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, p. 274.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>вҖңAbout this time a beautiful white bird, web-footed, and not unlike a dove in size and plumage</i>, hovered over the mast-head of the cutter, and, notwithstanding the pitching of the boat, frequently <i>attempted to perch on it</i>, and continued <i>fluttering there till dark</i>. Trifling as such an incident may appear, we all considered it a <i>propitious omen</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Lady Hobart</i>, 1803,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 389.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI found it necessary to caution the people against being deceived by the <i>appearance of land</i>, or calling out till we were quite convinced of its reality, more especially as <i>fog-banks</i> are often mistaken for land: several of the poor fellows nevertheless repeatedly exclaimed <i>they heard breakers</i>, and some the <i>firing of guns</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Lady Hobart,вҖқ Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii. 391.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>At length one of them broke out into a most immoderate swearing fit of joy</i>, which I could not restrain, and declared, that <i>he had never seen land in his life, if what he now saw was not so</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Centaur,вҖқ ibid</i>., p. 55.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe joy at a speedy relief affected us all in a most remarkable way. Many <i>burst into tears; some looked at each other with a stupid stare, as if doubtful</i> of the reality of what they saw; while several were in such a lethargic condition, that no animating words could rouse them to exertion. At this affecting period, I proposed offering up our solemn thanks to Heaven for the miraculous deliverance.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLoss of the <i>Lady Hobart,вҖқ ibid</i>., p. 391.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[After having suffered the horrors of hunger and thirst for many days, вҖңthey accidentally descried a <i>small</i> turtle <i>floating on the surface of the water asleep</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңSufferings of the Crew of the <i>Thomas,вҖқ ibid</i>., p. 356.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAn indifferent spectator would have been at a loss which most to admire; the eyes of famine sparkling at immediate relief, or the horror of their preservers at the sight of so many spectres, whose ghastly countenances, if the cause had been unknown, would rather have excited terror than pity. Our bodies were nothing but skin and bones, our limbs were full of sores, and we were clothed in rags.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Narrative of the Mutiny of the Bounty</i>, by William Bligh, 1790, p. 80. Compare <i>The Siege of Corinth</i>, lines 1048, 1049, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 494, note 3.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThey discovered land <i>right ahead</i>, and steered for it. There being a very <i>heavy surf</i>, they endeavoured to turn the boatвҖҷs head to it, which, from weakness, they were unable to accomplish, and soon afterwards <i>the boat upset</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңSufferings of Six Deserters from St.В Helena, 1799,вҖқ <i>Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea</i>, 1812, iii, 371.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare lines вҖңWritten after swimming from Sestos to Abydos,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 13, note 1; see, too, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 262, 263, note 1.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңHow long in that same fit I lay</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">I have not to declare.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Ancient Mariner</i>, Part V. lines 393, 394.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ in short sheвҖҷs one.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">A set of humbug rascals, when allвҖҷs doneвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>IвҖҷve seen much finer women, ripe and real,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than all the nonsense of their dвҒ вёәвҒ d ideal.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza 1. lines 6вҒ вҖ“вҒ 9, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 366, note 1.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Probably that вҖңAlpha and Omega of Beauty,вҖқ Lady Adelaide Forbes (daughter of George, sixth Earl of Granard), whom Byron compared to the Apollo Belvidere. See <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 230, note 3.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe <i>saya</i> or <i>basquiГұa</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the outer petticoatвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ is always black, and is put over the indoor dress on going out.вҖқ Compare <span title="Melanei/mones a(/pantes">ОңОөО»ОұОҪОөОҜОјОҝОҪОөПӮ бј…ПҖОұОҪП„ОөПӮ</span> <span title="to\ ple/on e)n sa/gois">П„бҪё ПҖО»ОӯОҝОҪ бјҗОҪ ПғО¬ОіОҝО№ПӮ</span>, Strabo, lib. iii. ed. 1807, i. 210. FordвҖҷs <i>Handbook for Spain</i>, 1855, i. 111.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWhen Ajax, Ulysses, and Phoenix stand before Achilles, he rushes forth to greet them, brings them into the tent, directs Patroclus to mix the wine, cuts up the meat, dresses it, and sets it before the ambassadors.вҖқ (<i>Iliad</i>, ix. 193, sq.)вҒ вҖ”<i>Study of the Classics</i>, by H.N. Coleridge, 1830, p, 71] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And such a bed of furs, and a pelisse.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ which often spread,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And come like opening Hell upon the mind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No вҖңbaseless fabricвҖқ but вҖңa wrack behind.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Had eвҖҷer escaped more dangers on the deep;вҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And those who are not drowned, at least may sleep.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Entitled вҖң<i>A Narrative of the Honourable John Byron</i> (Commodore in a late expedition round the world), containing an account of the great distresses suffered by himself and his companions on the coast of Patagonia, from the year 1740, till their arrival in England, 1746. Written by Himself,вҖқ London, 1768, 40. For the Hon.В John Byron, 1723вҒ вҖ“вҒ 86, younger brother of William, fifth Lord Byron, see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 3.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Wore for a husbandвҒ вҖ”or some such like brute.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ although of late</span>
							<br/>
							<span>IвҖҷve changed, for some few years, the day to night.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The second canto of <i>Don Juan</i> was finished in January, 1819, when the Venetian Carnival was at its height.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Strabo (lib. xvi. ed. 1807, p. 1106) gives various explanations of the name, assigning the supposed redness to the refraction of the rays of the vertical sun; or to the shadow of the scorched mountain-sides which form its shores; or, as Ctesias would have it, to a certain fountain which discharged red oxide of lead into its waters. вҖңAbyssinianвҖқ Bruce had no doubt that вҖңlarge trees or plants of coral spread everywhere over the bottom,вҖқ made the sea вҖңred,вҖқ and accounted for the name. But, according to Niebuhr, the Red Sea is the Sea of Edom, which, being interpreted, is вҖңRed.вҖқ] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ just the same</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As at this moment I should like to do;вҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But I have done with kissesвҒ вҖ”having kissed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All those that wouldвҒ вҖ”regretting those I missed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Fair as the rose just plucked to crown the wreath,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Soft as the unfledged birdling when at rest.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Mazeppa</i>, lines 829, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 232.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That finer melody was never heard,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The kind of sound whose echo is a tear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose accents are the steps of MusicвҖҷs throne.[*]</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[*] [вҖңTo the Publisher. Take of these varieties which is thought best. I have no choice.вҖқ] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Moore, quoting from memory from one of ByronвҖҷs MS. journals, says that he speaks of вҖңmaking earnest love to the younger of his fair hostesses at Seville, with the help of a dictionary.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Life,</i> p. 93. See, too, letter to his mother, August 11, 1809, <i>Letters,</i> 1898, i. 240.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Pressure of hands, et ceteraвҒ вҖ”or a kiss.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Italian rather more, having more teachers.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIn 1813вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ in the fashionable world of London, of which I then formed an item, a fraction, the segment of a circle, the unit of a million, the nothing of something.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I had been the lion of 1812.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Extracts from a Diary, January 19, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 177, 178.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>foes, friends, sex, kind, are nothing more to me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than a mere dream of something oвҖҷer the sea.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the same archaism or blunder, compare <i>Manfred</i>, act i. sc. 4, line 19, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 132.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Prisoner of Chillon</i>, line 78, <i>ibid</i>., p. 16.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Holding her sweet breath oвҖҷer his cheek and mouth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As oвҖҷer a bed of roses, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide post</i>, <a>Canto XVI. stanza lxxxvi.</a> line 6, <a>p. 598, note 1</a>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">For without heart Love is not quite so good;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ceres is commissary to our bellies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And Love, which also much depends on food:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While Bacchus will provide with wine and jelliesвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Oysters and eggs are also living food.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He was her own, her Ocean lover, cast</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To be her soulвҖҷs first idol, and its last.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And saw the sunset and the rising moon.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The MS. and the editions of 1819, 1823, 1828, read вҖңwoman.вҖқ The edition of 1833 reads вҖңwomen.вҖқ The text follows the MS. and the earlier editions.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare stanza prefixed to Dedication, <i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 2</a>.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңYes! thy Sherbet to-night will sweetly flow,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>See how it sparkles in its vase of snow!вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Corsair</i>, Canto I. lines 427, 428, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 242.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A pleasure naught but drunkenness can bring:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">For not the blest sherbet all chilled with snow.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor the full sparkle of the desert-spring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Nor wine in all the purple of its glow.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Spread like an Ocean, varied, vast, and bright.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёә IвҖҷm sure they never reckoned;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And being joinedвҒ вҖ”like swarming bees they clung,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And mixed until the very pleasure stung.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And one was innocent, but both too young,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their hearts the flowers, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In all the burning tongues the Passions teach</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">They had no further feeling, hope, nor care</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Save one, and that was Love.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Pillowed upon her beating heartвҒ вҖ”which panted</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With the sweet memory of all it granted.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Some drown themselves, some in the vices grovel.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lady Caroline LambвҖҷs <i>Glenarvon</i> was published in 1816. For ByronвҖҷs farewell letter of dismissal, which Lady Caroline embodied in her novel (vol. iii. chap. ix.), see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 135, note 1. According to Medwin (<i>Conversations</i>, 1824, p. 274), Madame de StaГ«l catechized Byron with regard to the relation of the story to fact.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In their sweet feelings holily united,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">By Solitude (soft parson) they were wed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Titus forebore to marry вҖңIncestaвҖқ Berenice (see Juv., <i>Sat</i>. vi. 158), the daughter of Agrippa I., and wife of Herod, King of Chalcis, out of regard to the national prejudice against intermarriage with an alien.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CГҰsarвҖҷs third wife, Pompeia, was suspected of infidelity with Clodius (see LanghorneвҖҷs <i>Plutarch</i>, 1838, p. 498); PompeyвҖҷs third wife, Mucia, intrigued with CГҰsar (<i>vide ibid</i>., p. 447); MahometвҖҷs favourite wife, Ayesha, on one occasion incurred suspicion; Antonina, the wife of Belisarius, was notoriously profligate (see GibbonвҖҷs <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, iii. 432, 102).] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Sardanapalus</i>, act i. sc. 2, line 252, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 23, note 1.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”of ticklish dust.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңMr.В Hobhouse is at it again about indelicacy. There is <i>no indelicacy</i>. If he wants <i>that</i>, let him read Swift, his great idol; but his imagination must be a dunghill, with a viperвҖҷs nest in the middle, to engender such a supposition about this poem.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, May 15, 1819, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 295.] <a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Two hundred stanzas reckoned as before.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-2.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 3-->
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[November 30, 1819. Copied in 1820 (MS.D.). Moore (<i>Life</i>, 421) says that Byron was at work on the third canto when he stayed with him at Venice, in October, 1819. вҖңOne day, before dinner, [he] read me two or three hundred lines of it; beginning with the stanzas вҖңOh Wellington,вҖқ etc., which, at the time, formed the opening of the third canto, but were afterwards reserved for the commencement of the ninth.вҖқ The third canto, as it now stands, was completed by November 8, 1819; see <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 375. The date on the MS. may refer to the first fair copy.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And fits her like a stocking or a glove.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn peut trouver des femmes qui nвҖҷont jamais eu de galanterie, mais il est rare dвҖҷen trouver qui nвҖҷen aient jamais eu quвҖҷune.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>RГ©flexions</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ du Duc de la Rochefoucauld, No. lxxiii.</p>
					<p>Byron prefixed the maxim as a motto to his вҖңOde to a Lady whose Lover was killed by a Ball, which at the same time shivered a Portrait next his Heart.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 552.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Merchant of Venice</i>, act iv. sc. 1, line 254.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Had PetrarchвҖҷs passion led to PetrarchвҖҷs wedding,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How many sonnets had ensued the bedding?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Ballad of вҖңDeath and the LadyвҖқ was printed in a small volume, entitled <i>A Guide to Heaven</i>, 1736, 12mo. It is mentioned in <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i> (chap. xvii.), <i>Works of Oliver Goldsmith</i>, 1854, i. 369. See <i>Old English Popular Music</i>, by William Chappell, F.S.A., 1893, ii. 170, 171.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>The Prophecy of Dante,</i> Canto I. lines 172вҒ вҖ“вҒ 174, <i>Poetical Works,</i> 1901, iv. 253, note 1.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>MiltonвҖҷs first wife ran away from him within the first month. If she had not, what would John Milton have done?</p>
					<p>[Mary Powell did not вҖңrun away,вҖқ but at the end of the honeymoon obtained her husbandвҖҷs consent to visit her family at Shotover, вҖңupon a promise of returning at Michaelmas.вҖқ вҖңAnd in the mean while his studies went on very vigorously; and his chief diversion, after the business of the day, was now and then in an evening to visit the Lady Margaret Lee.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ This lady, being a woman of excellent wit and understanding, had a particular honour for our author, and took great delight in his conversation; as likewise did her husband, Captain Hobson.вҖқ See, too, his sonnet вҖңTo the Lady Margaret Ley.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>The Life of Milton</i> (by Thomas Newton, D.D.), <i>Paradise Regained,</i> ed. (Baskerville), 1758, pp. xvii., xviii.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңYesterday a very pretty letter from Annabella.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is a poetessвҒ вҖ”a mathematicianвҒ вҖ”a metaphysician.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Journal</i> November 30, 1813, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 357.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Displayed much more of nerve, perhaps, of wit,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than any of the parodies of Pitt.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ toothpicks, a bidet.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>вҖң<i>Dr.В MurrayвҒ вҖ”As you are squeamish you may put вҖҳteapot, tray,вҖҷ in case the other piece of feminine furniture frightens you.вҒ вҖ”B.</i>вҖқ <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For ByronвҖҷs menagerie, see <i>Werner</i>, act i. sc. 1, line 216, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1902, v. 348, note 1.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңBut as for canine recollectionsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I had one (half a <i>wolf</i> by the she-side) that doted on me at ten years old, and very nearly ate me at twenty. When I thought he was going to enact Argus, he bit away the backside of my breeches, and never would consent to any kind of recognition, in despite of all kinds of bones which I offered him.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Moore, January 19, 1815, <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 171, 172. Compare, too, <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. Song, stanza ix., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 30.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Yet for all that donвҖҷt stay away too long,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A sofa, like a bed, may come by wrong.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷve known the friend betrayedвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Pyrrhic war-dance represented вҖңby rapid movements of the body, the way in which missiles and blows from weapons were avoided, and also the mode in which the enemy was attackedвҖқ (<i>Dict. of Ant.</i>). Dodwell (<i>Tour through Greece</i>, 1819, ii. 21, 22) observes that in Thessaly and Macedon dances are performed at the present day by men armed with their musket and sword. See, too, HobhouseвҖҷs description (<i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, i. 166, 167) of the Albanian war-dance at LoutrГЎki.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTheir manner of dancing is certainly the same that Diana is <i>sung</i> to have danced on the banks of Eurotas. The great lady still leads the dance, and is followed by a troop of young girls, who imitate her steps, and, if she sings, make up the chorus. The tunes are extremely gay and lively, yet with something in them wonderfully soft. The steps are varied according to the pleasure of her that leads the dance, but always in exact time, and infinitely more agreeable than any of our dances.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Lady M.W. Montagu to Pope, April 1, O.S., 1817, <i>Letters, etc.</i>, 1816, p. 138. The вҖңkerchief-wavingвҖқ dance is the <i>Romaika</i>. See <i>The Waltz</i>, line 125, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 492, note 1. See, too, <i>Voyage Pittoresque</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ by the Comte de Choiseul-Gouffier, 1782, vol. i. Planche 33.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That would have set Tom Moore, though married, raving.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңUpon the whole, I think the part of <i>Don Juan</i> in which LambroвҖҷs return to his home, and Lambro himself are described, is the best, that is, the most individual, thing in all I know of Lord B.вҖҷs works. The festal abandonment puts one in mind of Nicholas PoussinвҖҷs pictures.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Table Talk</i> of S.T. Coleridge, June 7, 1824.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Hudibras</i>, Part I. canto iii. lines 1, 2вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңAy me! what perils do environ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The man that meddles with cold iron!вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>ByronвҖҷs friend, C.S. Matthews, shouted these lines, <i>con intenzione</i>, under the windows of a Cambridge tradesman named Hiron, who had been instrumental in the expulsion from the University of Sir Henry Smyth, a riotous undergraduate. (See letter to Murray, October 19, 1820.)] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>All had been open, heart, and open house,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ever since Juan served her for a spouse.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңRispose allor Margutte: a dirtel tosto,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Io non credo piГ№ al nero chвҖҷ allвҖҷ azzurro;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ma nel cappone, o lesso, o vuogli arrosto,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>E credo alcuna volta anche nel burro;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nella cervogia, e quando io nвҖҷ ho nel mosto,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>E molto piГ№ nellвҖҷ aspro che il mangurro;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ma sopra tutto nel buon vino ho fede,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>E credo che sia salvo chi gli crede.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Pulci, <i>Morgante Maggiore</i>, Canto XVIII. stanza cxv.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For instance, if a first or second wife.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And send him forth like Samson strong in blindness.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And make him Samson-likeвҒ вҖ”more fierce with blindness.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. M.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Not so the single, deep, and wordless ire,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of a strong human heartвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAlmost all <i>Don Juan</i> is <i>real</i> life, either my own, or from people I knew. By the way, much of the description of the <i>furniture</i>, in Canto Third, is taken from <i>TullyвҖҷs Tripoli</i> (pray <i>note this</i>), and the rest from my own observation. Remember, I never meant to conceal this at all, and have only not stated it, because <i>Don Juan</i> had no preface, nor name to it.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, August 23, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 346.</p>
					<p>The first edition of <i>вҖңTullyвҖҷs TripoliвҖқ</i> is entitled <i>Narrative of a Ten YearsвҖҷ Residence in Tripoli In Africa: From the original correspondence in the possession of the Family of the late Richard Tully, Esq., the British Consul</i>, 1816, 410. The book is in the form of letters (so says the <i>Preface</i>) written by the ConsulвҖҷs sister. The description of HaidГ©eвҖҷs <i>dress</i> is taken from the account of a visit to Lilla Kebbiera, the wife of the Bashaw (p. 30); the description of the furniture and refreshments from the account of a visit to вҖңLilla Amnani,вҖқ Hadgi AbderrahmamвҖҷs Greek wife (pp. 132вҒ вҖ“вҒ 137). It is evident that the вҖңChielвҖқ who took <i>these</i> вҖңnotesвҖқ was the ConsulвҖҷs <i>sister</i>, not the Consul: вҖңLilla Aisha, the BeyвҖҷs wife, is thought to be very sensible, though rather haughty. Her apartments were grand, and herself superbly habited. Her chemise was covered with gold embroidery at the neck; over it she wore a gold and silver tissue <i>jileck</i>, or jacket without sleeves, and over that another of purple velvet richly laced with gold, with coral and pearl buttons set quite close together down the front; it had short sleeves finished with a gold band not far below the shoulder, and discovered a wide loose chemise of transparent gauze, with gold, silver, and ribband strips. She wore round her anclesвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ a sort of fetter made of a thick bar of gold so fine that they bound it round the leg with one hand; it is an inch and a half wide, and as much in thickness: each of these weighs four pounds. Just above this a band three inches wide of gold thread finished the ends of a pair of trousers made of pale yellow and white silk.вҖқ</p>
					<p>Page 132. вҖң[Lilla] rose to take coffee, which was served in very small china cups, placed in silver filigree cups; and gold filigree cups were put under those presented to the married ladies. They had introduced cloves, cinnamon, and saffron into the coffee, which was abundantly sweetened; but this mixture was very soon changed, and replaced by excellent simple coffee for the European ladies.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
					<p>Page 133. вҖңThe Greek then shewed us the gala furniture of her own room.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The hangings of the room were of tapestry, made in pannels of different coloured velvets, thickly inlaid with flowers of silk damask; a yellow border, of about a foot in depth, finished the tapestry at top and bottom, the upper border being embroidered with Moorish sentences from the Koran in lilac letters. The carpet was of crimson satin, with a deep border of pale blue quilted; this is laid over Indian mats and other carpets. In the best part of the room the sofa is placed, which occupies three sides in an alcove, the floor of which is raised. The sofa and the cushions that lay around were of crimson velvet, the centre cushions were embroidered with a sun in gold of highly embossed work, the rest were of gold and silver tissue. The curtains of the alcove were made to match those before the bed. A number of looking-glasses, and a profusion of fine china and chrystal completed the ornaments and furniture of the room, in which were neither tables nor chairs. A small table, about six inches high, is brought in when refreshments are served; it is of ebony, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, tortoiseshell, ivory, gold and silver, of choice woods, or of plain mahogany, according to the circumstances of the proprietor.вҖқ</p>
					<p>Page 136. вҖңOn the tables were placed all sorts of refreshments, and thirty or forty dishes of meat and poultry, dressed different ways; there were no knives nor forks, and only a few spoons of gold, silver, ivory, or coral.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
					<p>Page 137. вҖңThe beverage was various sherbets, some composed of the juice of boiled raisins, very sweet; some of the juice of pomegranates squeezed through the rind; and others of the pure juice of oranges. These sherbets were copiously supplied in high glass ewers, placed in great numbers on the ground.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ After the dishes of meat were removed, a dessert of Arabian fruits, confectionaries, and sweetmeats was served; among the latter was the date-bread. This sweetmeat is made in perfection only by the blacks at Fezzan, of the ripe date of the country.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ They make it in the shape of loaves, weighing from twenty to thirty pounds; the stones of the fruit are taken out, and the dates simply pressed together with great weights; thus preserved, it keeps perfectly good for a year.вҖқ] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHe writes like a man who has that clear perception of the truth of things which is the result of the guilty knowledge of good and evil; and who, by the light of that knowledge, has deliberately preferred the evil with a proud malignity of purpose, which would seem to leave little for the last consummating change to accomplish. When he calculates that the reader is on the verge of pitying him, he takes care to throw him back the defiance of laughter, as if to let him know that all the PoetвҖҷs pathos is but the sentimentalism of the drunkard between his cups, or the relenting softness of the courtesan, who the next moment resumes the bad boldness of her degraded character. With such a man, who would wish either to laugh or to weep?вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Eclectic Review</i> (Lord ByronвҖҷs <i>Mazeppa</i>), August, 1819, vol. xii. p. 150.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For thatвҖҷs the name they like to cant beneath.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The upholstererвҖҷs вҖң<i>fiat lux</i>вҖқ had bade to issue.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This dress is Moorish, and the bracelets and bar are worn in the manner described. The reader will perceive hereafter, that as the mother of HaidГ©e was of Fez, her daughter wore the garb of the country. [<i>Vide ante</i>, <a>p. 160, note 1</a>.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The bar of gold above the instep is a mark of sovereign rank in the women of the families of the Deys, and is worn as such by their female relatives. [<i>Vide ibid.</i>] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is no exaggeration: there were four women whom I remember to have seen, who possessed their hair in this profusion; of these, three were English, the other was a Levantine. Their hair was of that length and quantity, that, when let down, it almost entirely shaded the person, so as nearly to render dress a superfluity. Of these, only one had dark hair; the OrientalвҖҷs had, perhaps, the lightest colour of the four. <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңYet there was round thee such a dawn</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of Light neвҖҷer seen before,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As Fancy never could have drawn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And never can restore.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Song by Rev. C. Wolfe (1791вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Compare, tooвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңShe was a form of Life and Light</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That, seen, became a part of sight.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Giaour</i>, lines 1127, 1128.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but Psyche owns no lordвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">She walks a goddess from above;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All saw, all praised her, all adored,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But no one ever dared to love.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Golden Ass of Apuleius; in English verse, entitled Cupid and Psyche</i>, by Hudson Gurney, 1799.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>King John</i>, act iv. sc. 2, line 11.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңRichard Crashaw (died 1650), the friend of Cowley, was honoured,вҖқ says Warton, вҖңwith the praise of Pope; who both read his poems and borrowed from them. After he was ejected from his Fellowship at Peterhouse for denying the covenant, he turned Roman Catholic, and died canon of the church at Loretto.вҖқ Cowley sang his <i>In Memoriam</i>вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖң<i>Angels</i> (they say) brought the famed <i>Chappel</i> there;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And bore the sacred Load in Triumph through the air:вҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>вҖҳT is surer much they brought thee there, and <i>They,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>And <i>Thou</i>, their charge, went <i>singing</i> all the way.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Works, etc.</i>, 1668, pp. 29, 30.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Believed like SoutheyвҒ вҖ”and perused like Crashaw.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The second chapter of ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Biographia Literaria</i> is on the вҖңsupposed irritability of men of genius.вҖқ Ed. 1847, i. 29.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Their poet a sad Southey.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of roguesвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of which the causers never know the cause.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide St.В August. Epist.</i>, xxxvi., cap. xiv., вҖңIlle [Ambrosius, Mediolanensis Episcopus] adjecit; Quando hic sum, non jejuno sabbato; quando Romae sum, jejuno sabbato.вҖқвҒ вҖ”MigneвҖҷs <i>PatrologiГҰ Cursus</i>, 1845, xxxiii. 151.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>From the high lyrical to the low rational.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The allusion is to ColeridgeвҖҷs eulogy of Southey in the Biographia Literaria (ed. 1847, i. 61): вҖңIn poetry he has attempted almost every species of composition known before, and he has added new ones; and if we except the very highest lyricвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ he has attempted every species successfully.вҖқ But the satire, primarily and ostensibly aimed at Southey, now and again glances at SoutheyвҖҷs eulogist.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңGoethe pourroit reprГ©senter la littГ©rature allemande toute entiГЁre.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>De LвҖҷAllemagne</i>, par Mme.В la Baronne de StaГ«l-Holstein, 1818, i. 227.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The poet is not вҖңa sad Southey,вҖқ but is sketched from memory. вҖңLord Byron,вҖқ writes Finlay (<i>History of Greece</i>, vi. 335, note), вҖңused to describe an evening passed in the company of Londos [a Morean landowner, who took part in the first and second Greek Civil Wars], at Vostitza (in 1809), when both were young men, with a spirit that rendered the scene worthy of a place in <i>Don Juan</i>. After supper Londos, who had the face and figure of a chimpanzee, sprang upon a table,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and commenced singing through his nose RhigaвҖҷs Hymn to Liberty. A new cadi, passing near the house, inquired the cause of the discordant hubbub. A native Mussulman replied, вҖҳIt is only the young primate Londos, who is drunk, and is singing hymns to the new panaghia of the Greeks, whom they call Eleutheria.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқ (See letter to Andreas Londos (undated), <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 320, note 1.)] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span title="Maka/rГҙn nГӘ~soi">ОңОұОәО¬ПҒПүОҪ ОҪбҝҶПғОҝО№</span> [Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, line 169] of the Greek poets were supposed to have been the Cape de Verd Islands, or the Canaries. <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Euboea looks on Marathon,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And Marathon looks on the sea, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See ГҶschylus, <i>PersГҰ</i>, 463, sq.; and Herodotus, viii. 90. Harpocration records the preservation, in the Acropolis, of the silver-footed throne on which Xerxes sat when he watched the battle of Salamis from the slope of Mount ГҶgaleos.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The Heroic heart awakes no more.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. D.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңthat most ancient military dance, the <i>Pyrrhica</i>,вҖқ see <i>Travels</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1814, part ii. sect. 11, p. 641; and for specimens of вҖңCadmean characters,вҖқ <i>vide ibid.</i>, p. 593.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[After his birthplace Teos was taken by the Persians, B.C. 510, Anacreon migrated to Abdera, but afterwards lived at Samos, under the protection of Polycrates.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which Hercules might deem his own.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See the translation of a speech delivered to the Pargiots, in 1815, by an aged citizen: вҖңI exhort you well to consider, before you yield yourselves up to the English, that the King of England now has in his pay all the kings of EuropeвҒ вҖ”obtaining money for this purpose from his merchants; whence, should it become advantageous to the merchants to sell you, in order to conciliate Ali, and obtain certain commercial advantages in his harbours, the <i>English will sell you to Ali.</i>вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңParga,вҖқ <i>Edinburgh Review</i>, October, 1819. vol. 32, pp. 263вҒ вҖ“вҒ 293. Here, perhaps, the вҖңFranksвҖқ are the Russians. CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i8">вҖңGreeks only should free Greece,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not the barbarian with his masque of peace.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Age of Bronze</i>, lines 298, 299, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 557, note 1.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[О“ОөОҪОҝОҜОјОұОҪ, бјөОҪвҖҷ бҪ‘О»бҫ¶ОөОҪ бј”ПҖОөПғП„О№ ПҖПҢОҪ-</span>
							<br/>
							<span>П„ОҝП… ПҖПҒПҢОІО»О·ОјвҖҷ бјҒО»ОҜОәО»П…ПғП„ОҝОҪ, бј„-</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ОәПҒОұОҪ бҪ‘ПҖбҪё ПҖО»О¬ОәОұ ОЈОҝП…ОҪОҜОҝП…, Оә.П„.О».</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Sophocles, <i>Ajax</i>, lines 1190вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1192.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWhat poets feel not, when they make,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">A pleasure in creating,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The world, in <i>its</i> turn, will not take</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Pleasure in contemplating.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Matthew Arnold (Motto to <i>Poems</i>, 1869, vol. i. Fly-leaf).]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For this вҖңsentence,вҖқ see <i>Journal</i>, November 16, 1813, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 320, note 1; see, too, letter to Rogers, 1814, <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 89, note 1.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In digging drains for a new water-closet.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For Edmund Hoyle (1672вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1769), see <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, lines 966вҒ вҖ“вҒ 968, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 372, note 4.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[William Coxe (1747вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1828), Archdeacon of Wilts, a voluminous historian and biographer, published <i>Memoirs of John, Duke of Marlborough</i>, in 1817вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1819.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>Life of Milton, Works</i> of Samuel Johnson, 1825, vii. pp. 67, 68, 80, <i>et vide ante</i>, <a>p. 146, note 2</a>.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[According to Suetonius, the youthful Titus amused himself by copying handwriting, and boasted that he could have made a first-rate <i>falsarius</i>. One of CГҰsarвҖҷs вҖңearliest actsвҖқ was to crucify some jovial pirates, who had kidnapped him, and with whom he pretended to be on pleasant if not friendly terms.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[James Currie, M.D. (1756вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1805), published, anonymously, the <i>Works of Robert Burns, with an account of his Life, etc.</i>, in 1800.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHe [Cromwell] was very notorious for robbing orchards, a puerile crimeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but grown so scandalous and injurious by the frequent spoyls and damages of Trees, breaking of Hedges, and Inclosures, committed by this <i>Apple-Dragon</i>, that many solemn complaints were made both to his Father and Mother for redresse thereof; which missed not their satisfaction and expiation out of his hide,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Flagellum</i>, by James Heath, 1663, p. 5. See, too, for his вҖңname of a RoysterвҖқ at Cambridge, <i>A Short View of the Late Troubles in England</i>, by Sir William Dugdale, 1681, p. 459.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In <i>The Friend</i>, 1818, ii. 38, Coleridge refers to вҖңa planвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ of trying the experiment of human perfectibility on the banks of the Susquehanna;вҖқ and Southey, in his <i>Letter to William Smith, Esq.</i> (1817), (<i>Essays Moral and Political</i>, by Robert Southey, 1832, ii. 17), speaks of his вҖңpurpose to retire with a few friends into the wilds of America, and there lay the foundations of a community,вҖқ etc.; but the word вҖң<i>Pantisocracy</i>вҖқ is not mentioned. It occurs, perhaps, for the first time in print, in George DyerвҖҷs biographical sketch of Southey, which he contributed to <i>Public Characters of 1799вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1800</i>, p. 225, вҖңColeridge, no less than Southey, possessed a strong passion for poetry. They commenced, like two young poets, an enthusiastic friendship, and in connection with others, struck out a plan for settling in America, and for having all things in common. This scheme they called Pantisocracy.вҖқ Hence, the phrase must have вҖңcaught on,вҖқ for, in a footnote to his review of ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Literary Life</i> (<i>Edin. Rev.</i>, August, 1817, vol. xxviii. p. 501), Jeffrey speaks of вҖңthe Pantisocratic or Lake School.вҖқ] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Wordsworth <i>was</i> вҖңhired,вҖқ but not, like Burns, вҖңexcised.вҖқ Hazlitt (<i>Lectures on the English Poets</i>, 1870, p. 174) is responsible for the epithet: вҖңMr.В Wordsworth might have shown the incompatibility between the Muse and the Excise,вҖқ etc.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Confined his pedlar poems to democracy.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Coleridge began his poetical contributions to the <i>Morning Post</i> in January, 1798; his poetical articles in 1800.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Flourished its sophistry for aristocracy.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Coleridge was married to Sarah Fricker, October 5; Southey to her younger sister Edith, November 15, 1795. Their father, Stephen Fricker, who had been an innkeeper, and afterwards a potter at Bristol, migrated to Bath about the year 1780. For the last six years of his life he was owner and manager of a coal wharf. He had inherited a small fortune, and his wife brought him money, but he died bankrupt, and left his family destitute. His widow returned to Bristol, and kept a school. In a letter to Murray, dated September 11, 1822 (<i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 113), Byron quotes the authority of вҖңLuttrell,вҖқ and вҖңhis friend Mr.В Nugent,вҖқ for the statement that Mrs.В Southey and вҖңColeridgeвҖҷs SaraвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ before they were marriedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ were millinerвҖҷs or dressmakerвҖҷs apprentices.вҖқ The story rests upon their evidence. It is certain that in 1794, when Coleridge appeared upon the scene, the sisters earned their living by going out to work in the houses of friends, and were not, at that time, вҖңmilliners of Bath.вҖқ] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For Joanna Southcott (1750вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1814), see <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 128вҒ вҖ“вҒ 130, note 2.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Here follows, in the original MS.вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңTime has approved Ennui to be the best</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of friends, and opiate draughts; your love and wine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which shake so much the human brain and breast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Must end in languor;вҒ вҖ”men must sleep like swine:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The happy lover and the welcome guest</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Both sink at last into a swoon divine;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Full of deep raptures and of bumpers, they</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are somewhat sick and sorry the next day.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQuandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Hor., <i>Epist. Ad Pisones</i>, line 359.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[WordsworthвҖҷs <i>Benjamin the Waggoner</i>, was written in 1805, but was not published till 1819. вҖңBenjaminвҖқ was servant to William Jackson, a Keswick carrier, who built Greta Hall, and let off part of the house to Coleridge.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThereвҖҷs something in a flying horse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ThereвҖҷs something in a huge balloon;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But through the clouds IвҖҷll never float</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Until I have a little Boat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shaped like the crescent-moon.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>WordsworthвҖҷs <i>Peter Bell</i>, stanza i.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For MedeaвҖҷs escape from the wrath of Jason, вҖңTitaniacis ablata draconibus,вҖқ see Ovid., <i>Met.</i>, vii. 398.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his вҖңEssay, Supplementary to the Preface,вҖқ to his вҖңPoemsвҖқ of 1815, Wordsworth, commenting on a passage on Night in DrydenвҖҷs <i>Indian Emperor</i>, says, вҖңDrydenвҖҷs lines are vague, bombastic, and senseless.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The verses of Dryden once celebrated are forgotten.вҖқ He is not passing any general criticism on вҖңhim who drew <i>Achitophel</i>.вҖқ In a letter to Sir Walter Scott (November 7, 1805), then engaged on his great edition of DrydenвҖҷs <i>Works</i>, he admits that Dryden is not вҖңas a poet any great favourite of mine. I admire his talents and genius highly, but he is not a poetical genius. The only qualities I can find in Dryden that are <i>essentially</i> poetical, are a certain ardour and impetuosity of mind, with an excellent earвҖқ (<i>Life of Wordsworth</i>, by W. Knight, 1889, ii. 26вҒ вҖ“вҒ 29). Scott may have remarked on WordsworthвҖҷs estimate of Dryden in conversation with Byron.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>While swung the signal from the sacred tower.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Are not these pretty stanzas?вҒ вҖ”some folks sayвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Downright in printвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Lines to Nature</i>, which were published in the <i>Morning Herald</i>, in 1815, but must have been unknown to ByronвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңSo will I build my altar in the fields,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the blue sky my fretted dome shall be.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAs early as the fifth or sixth century of the Christian era, the port of Augustus was converted into pleasant orchards, and a lovely grove of pines covered the ground where the Roman fleet once rode at anchor.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ This advantageous situation was fortified by art and <i>labour</i>, and in the twentieth year of his age, the Emperor of the WestвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ retired toвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the walls and morasses of Ravenna.вҖқвҒ вҖ”GibbonвҖҷs <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, ii. 244, 245.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe first time I had a conversation with Lord Byron on the subject of religion was at Ravenna, my native country, in 1820, while we were riding on horseback in an extensive solitary wood of pines. The scene invited to religious meditation. It was a fine day in spring. вҖҳHow,вҖҷ he said, вҖҳraising our eyes to heaven, or directing them to the earth, can we doubt of the existence of God?вҒ вҖ”or how, turning them to what is within us, can we doubt that there is something more noble and durable than the clay of which we are formed?вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”Count Gamba.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[If the <i>Pineta</i> of Ravenna, <i>bois funГЁbre</i>, invited Byron вҖңto religious meditation,вҖқ the mental picture of the вҖңspectre huntsmanвҖқ pursuing his eternal vengeance on вҖңthe inexorable dameвҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңthat fatal she,вҖқ who had mocked his woesвҒ вҖ”must have set in motion another train of thought. Such lines as these would вҖңspeak comfortablyвҖқ to himвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңBecause she deemвҖҷd I well deserved to die,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And <i>made a merit</i> of her cruelty,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mine is the ungrateful maid by heaven designвҖҷd:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mercy she would not give, nor mercy shall she find.вҖқ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>вҖңBy her example warnвҖҷd, the rest beware;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More easy, less imperious, were the fair;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And that one hunting, which the Devil designвҖҷd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For one fair female, lost him half the kind.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>DrydenвҖҷs <i>Theodore and Honoria</i> (<i>sub fine</i>).]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>О•ПғПҖОөПҒОө ПҖОұОҪП„Оұ ПҶОөПҒОөО№ПӮ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ОҰОөПҒОөО№ПӮ ОҝО№ОҪОҝОҪвҒ вҖ”ПҶОөПҒОөО№ПӮ ОұО№ОіОұ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ОҰОөПҒОөО№ПӮ ОјОұП„ОөПҒО№ ПҖОұО№ОҙОұ.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>
							<i>Fragment of Sappho.</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[ПңОӯПғПҖОөПҒОө, ПҖО¬ОҪП„Оұ ПҶОӯПҒПүОҪ, бҪ…ПғОұ ПҶОұОҜОҪОҝО»О№ПӮ бјҗПғОәОӯОҙОұПғвҖҷ ОұбҪ”ПүПӮВ·</span>
							<br/>
							<span>ОҰОӯПҒОөО№ПӮ ОҝбјҙОҪ ПҶОӯПҒОөО№ПӮ Оұбј¶ОіОұ, ОҰОӯПҒОөО№ПӮ бј„ПҖП… ОјОұП„ОӯПҒО№ ПҖОұбҝ–ОҙОұ.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Sappho</i>, Memoir, Text, by Henry Thornton Wharton, 1895, p. 136.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңEvening, all things thou bringest</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Which dawn spread apart from each other;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The lamb and the kid thou bringest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Thou bringest the boy to his mother.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>J.A. Symonds.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Compare TennysonвҖҷs <i>Locksley Hall, Sixty Years After</i>вҒ вҖ”вҖңHesper, whom the poet callвҖҷd the Bringer home of all good things.вҖқ] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңEra giГ  lвҖҷora che volge il disio</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Ai naviganti, e intenerisce il cuore;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Lo di chвҖҷ han detto ai dolci amici addio;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>E che lo nuovo peregrinвҖҷ damore</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Punge, se ode squilla di lontano,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Che paia il giorno pianger che si more.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>DanteвҖҷs <i>Purgatory</i>, canto viii., lines 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 6.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>This last line is the first of GrayвҖҷs Elegy, taken by him without acknowledgment. <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Suetonius for this fact.</p>
					<p>[вҖңThe public joy was so great upon the occasion of his death, that the common people ran up and down with caps upon their heads. And yet there were some, who for a long time trimmed up his tomb with spring and summer flowers, and, one while, placed his image upon his rostra dressed up in state robes, another while published proclamations in his name, as if he was yet alive, and would shortly come to Rome again, with a vengeance to all his enemies.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>De XII. CГҰs.</i>, lib. vi. cap. lvii.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But IвҖҷm digressingвҒ вҖ”what on earth have Nero</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And WordsworthвҒ вҖ”both poetical buffoons, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>De PoeticГў</i>, cap. xxiv. See, too, the Preface to DrydenвҖҷs вҖңDedicationвҖқ of the <i>ГҶneis</i> (<i>Works</i> of John Dryden, 1821, xiv. 130вҒ вҖ“вҒ 134). Dryden is said to have derived his knowledge of Aristotle from DacierвҖҷs translation, and it is probable that Byron derived his from Dryden. See letter to Hodgson (<i>Letters</i>, 1891, v. 284), in which he quotes Aristotle as quoted in JohnsonвҖҷs <i>Life of Dryden</i>.] <a href="canto-3.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 4-->
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңTill Pride and worse Ambition threw me down,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Warring in Heaven against HeavenвҖҷs matchless King.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Paradise Lost</i>, iv. 40, 41.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңTime hovers oвҖҷer, impatient to destroy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And shuts up all the passages of joy:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fruit autumnal, and the vernal flowвҖҷr;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With listless eyes the dotard views the store,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He views, and wonders that they please no more.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>JohnsonвҖҷs <i>Vanity of Human Wishes.</i>]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ my May of Life</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is fallвҖҷn into the sere, the yellow leaf.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 3, lines 22, 23.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Itself to that fit apathy whose deed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>First in the icy depths of LetheвҖҷs spring.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See вҖңIntroduction to the <i>Morgante Maggiore</i>,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 280.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Pulci being FatherвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCum canerem reges et prГҰlia, Cynthius aurem Vellit, et admonuit.вҖқ Virgil, <i>Ecl.</i> vi. lines 3, 4.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ from its motherвҖҷs knee</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">When its last weaning draught is drained for ever,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The child dividedвҒ вҖ”it were less to see,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than these two from each other torn apart.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See Herodotus (<i>Cleobis and Biton</i>), i. 31. The sentiment is in a fragment of Menander.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>бҪҚОҪ Оҝбјұ ОёОөОҝбҪ¶ ПҶО№О»ОҝбҝҰПғО№ОҪ бјҖПҖОҝОёОҪО®ПғОәОөО№ ОҪОӯОҝПӮ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>бҪҚОҪ ОібҪ°ПҒ ПҶО№О»Оөбҝ– ОёОөбҪёПӮ бјҖПҖОҝОёОҪО®ПғОәОөО№ ОҪОӯОҝПӮ.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Menandri at Philomenis reliquiГҰ</i>, edidit Augustus Meineke, p. 48.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>See <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 22, note 1. Byron applied the saying to Allegra in a letter to Sir Walter Scott, dated May 4, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 57.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto II. stanza xcvi. line 7. Compare, too, YoungвҖҷs <i>Night Thoughts</i> (вҖңThe Complaint,вҖқ Night I. ed. 1825, p. 5)] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare SwiftвҖҷs вҖңlittle languageвҖқ in his letter to Stella: <i>Podefar</i>, for instance, which is supposed to stand for вҖңPoor dear foolish rogue,вҖқ and Ppt., which meant вҖңPoor pretty thing.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See <i>The Journal of Stella</i>, edited by G.A. Aitken, 1901, xxxv. note 1, and вҖңJournal: March, 1710вҒ вҖ“вҒ 11,вҖқ 165, note 2.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For theirs were buoyant spirits, which would bound</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">вҖҷGainst common failings, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reference may be to ColeridgeвҖҷs <i>Kubla Khan</i>, which, to MedwinвҖҷs wonderment, вҖңdelightedвҖқ Byron (<i>Conversations</i>, 1824, p. 264). De QuincyвҖҷs <i>Confessions of an English Opium Eater</i> appeared in the <i>London Magazine</i>, October, November, 1821, after Cantos III., IV., V., of <i>Don Juan</i> were published. But, perhaps, he was contrasting the вҖңsimpler blissesвҖқ of Juan and HaidГ©e with ShelleyвҖҷs mystical affinities and divagations.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ had set their hearts a bleeding.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThe shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I better brook than flourishing peopled towns:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There can I sit alone, unseen of any,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And to the nightingaleвҖҷs complaining notes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tune my distresses, and record, my woes.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Two Gentlemen of Verona</i>, act v. sc. 4, lines 2вҒ вҖ“вҒ 6.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Called social, where all Vice and Hatred are.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Moved with her dreamвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Strange state of being!вҒ вҖ”for вҖҳt is still to beвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And who can know all false what then we see?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare the description of the вҖңspacious cave,вҖқ in <i>The Island</i>, Canto IV. lines 121, <i>sq., Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 629, note 1.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ methought.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reader will observe a curious mark of propinquity which the poet notices, with respect to the hands of the father and daughter. Lord Byron, we suspect, is indebted for the first hint of this to Ali Pacha, who, by the bye, is the original of Lambro; for, when his lordship was introduced, with his friend Hobhouse, to that agreeable mannered tyrant, the Vizier said that he knew he was the <i>Megalos Anthropos</i> (i.e. the great Man), by the smallness of his ears and hands.вҒ вҖ”Galt. See ByronвҖҷs letter to his mother, November 12, 1809, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 251.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And if <i>I</i> did my duty as <i>thou</i> hast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This hour were thine, and thy young minions last.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Till further orders should his doom assign.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Loving and lovedвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">But thou, sweet fury of the fiery rill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Makest on the liver a still worse attack;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Besides, thy price is something dearer still.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAs squire Sullen says, вҖҳ\My head aches consumedly,вҖҷ вҖҳScrub, bring me a dram!вҖҷ Drank some Imola wine, and some punch!вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Extracts from a Diary</i>, February 25, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 209. For rack or вҖңarrackвҖқ punch, see ThackerayвҖҷs <i>Vanity Fair, A Novel without a Hero</i>, chap. vi. ed. 1892, p. 44.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAt Fas [Fez] the houses of the great and wealthy have, within-side, spacious courts, adorned with sumptuous galleries, fountains, basons of fine marble, and fish-ponds, shaded with orange, lemon, pomegranate, and fig trees, abounding with fruit, and ornamented with roses, hyacinths, jasmine, violets, and orange flowers, emitting a delectable fragrance.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Account of the Empire of Marocco and Suez</i>, by James Grey Jackson, 1811, pp. 69, 70.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Beauty and Passion were the natural dower</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of HaidГ©eвҖҷs mother, but her climateвҖҷs force</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lay at her heart, though sleeping at the source.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But in her large eye lay deep PassionвҖҷs force,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Like to a lion sleeping by a source.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But in her large eye lay deep PassionвҖҷs force,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As sleeps a lion by a riverвҖҷs source.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Manfred</i>, act iii. sc. 1, line 128, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 125.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The blood gushed from her lips, and ears, and eyes:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those eyes, so beautifulвҒ вҖ”beheld no more.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is no very uncommon effect of the violence of conflicting and different passions. The Doge Francis Foscari, on his deposition in 1457, hearing the bells of St.В Mark announce the election of his successor, вҖңmourut subitement dвҖҷune hГ©morragie causГ©e par une veine qui sвҖҷГ©clata dans sa poitrineвҖқ [see Sismondi, 1815, x. 46, and Daru, 1821, ii. 536; see, too, <i>The Two Foscari</i>, act v. sc. i, line 306, and Introduction to the <i>Two Foscari</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 118, 193], at the age of eighty years, when вҖң<i>Who would have thought the old man had so much blood in him?</i>вҖқ (<i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 1, lines 34вҒ вҖ“вҒ 36.) Before I was sixteen years of age I was witness to a melancholy instance of the same effect of mixed passions upon a young person, who, however, did not die in consequence, at that time, but fell a victim some years afterwards to a seizure of the same kind, arising from causes intimately connected with agitation of mind. <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The view of the Venus of Medici instantly suggests the lines in the вҖңSeasonsвҖқ [the description of вҖңMusidora bathingвҖқ in <i>Summer</i>]вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ With wild surprise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As if to marble struck, devoid of sense,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A stupid moment motionless she stood:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So stands the statue that enchants the world.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Hobhouse.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A still closer parallel to this stanza, and to <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanzas xlix., cxl., cxli., clx., clxi., is to be found in ThomsonвҖҷs <i>Liberty</i>, pt. iv. lines 131вҒ вҖ“вҒ 206, where the вҖңFarnese Hercules,вҖқ the вҖңDying Gladiator,вҖқ the вҖңVenus of Medici,вҖқ and the вҖңLaocoonвҖқ group, are commemorated as typical works of art.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Distinct from life, as being still the same.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”working slow.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Have dawned a child of beauty, though of sin.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i8">[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Duncan is in his grave:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>After lifeвҖҷs fitful fever he sleeps well.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 2., lines 22, 23.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">No stone is there to read, nor tongue to say,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No dirgeвҒ вҖ”save when arise the stormy seas.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңBut now I am cabined, cribbed,вҖқ etc. <i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 24.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Jacob Bryant (1715вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1804) published his <i>Dissertation concerning the War of Troy, etc.</i>, in 1796. See <i>The Bride of Abydos</i>, Canto II. lines 510, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 179, note 1. See, too, <i>Extracts from a Diary</i>, January 11, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 165, 166, вҖңI have stood upon that plain [of Troy] <i>daily</i>, for more than a month, in 1810; and if anything diminished my pleasure, it was that the blackguard Bryant had impugned its veracity.вҖқ Hobhouse, in his <i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 93, sq., discusses at length the identity of the barrows of the Troad with the <i>tumuli</i> of Achilles, Ajax, and Protesilaus, and refutes BryantвҖҷs arguments against the identity of Cape Janissary and the Sigean promontory. <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>All heroes <span class="variant">who alive perhaps<br/>
							if still alive</span>.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”<span class="variant">and mountain-bounded<br/>
							and mountain-outlined</span> plain.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe whole region was, in a manner, in possession of the <i>SalsetteвҖҷs</i> crew, parties of whom, in their white summer dresses, might be seen scattered over the plains collecting the tortoises, which swarm on the sides of the rivulets, and are found under every furze-bush.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 116. See, too, for mention of вҖңhundreds of tortoisesвҖқ falling вҖңfrom the overhanging branches, and thick underwood,вҖқ into the waters of the Mender, <i>Travels, etc.</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1812, Part II. sect. i. p. 96.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ and land tortoise crawls.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”their learned researches bear.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a fact. A few years ago a man engaged a company for some foreign theatre, embarked them at an Italian port, and carrying them to Algiers, sold them all. One of the women, returned from her captivity, I heard sing, by a strange coincidence, in RossiniвҖҷs opera of <i>LвҖҷItaliana in Algieri</i>, at Venice, in the beginning of 1817.</p>
					<p>[We have reason to believe that the following, which we take from the MS. journal of a highly respectable traveller, is a more correct account: вҖңIn 1812 a Signor Guariglia induced several young persons of both sexesвҒ вҖ”none of them exceeding fifteen years of ageвҒ вҖ”to accompany him on an operatic excursion; part to form the opera, and part the ballet. He contrived to get them on board a vessel, which took them to Janina, where he sold them for the basest purposes. Some died from the effect of the climate, and some from suffering. Among the few who returned were a Signor Molinari, and a female dancer named Bonfiglia, who afterwards became the wife of Crespi, the tenor singer. The wretch who so basely sold them was, when Lord Byron resided at Venice, employed as <i>capo deвҖҷ vestarj</i>, or head tailor, at the Fenice.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Maria Graham (Lady Callcot). Ed. 1832.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[A comic singer in the <i>opera buffa</i>. The Italians, however, distinguish the <i>buffo cantante</i>, which requires good singing, from the <i>buffo comico</i>, in which there is more acting.вҒ вҖ”Ed. 1832.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The figuranti are those dancers of a ballet who do not dance singly, but many together, and serve to fill up the background during the exhibition of individual performers. They correspond to the chorus in the opera.вҒ вҖ”Maria Graham.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To help the ladies in their dress and lacing.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is strange that it should be the Pope and the Sultan, who are the chief encouragers of this branch of tradeвҒ вҖ”women being prohibited as singers at St.В PeterвҖҷs, and not deemed trustworthy as guardians of the harem.</p>
					<p>[вҖңScarcely a soul of them can read. Pacchierotti was one of the best informed of the <i>castrati</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Marchesi is so grossly ignorant that he wrote the word opera, <i>opperra</i>, but Nature has been so bountiful to the animal, that his ignorance and insolence were forgotten the moment he sang.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Venice, etc.</i>, by a Lady of Rank, 1824, ii. 86.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The N. Engl. Dict. cites Bunyan, Walpole, Fielding, Miss Austen, and Dickens as authorities for the plural вҖңwas.вҖқ See art. вҖңbe.вҖқ Here, as elsewhere, Byron wrote as he spoke.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He never shows his feelings, but his teeth.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOur firman arrived from Constantinople on the 30th of April (1810).вҖқвҒ вҖ”Travels in Albania, 1858, ii. 186.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That each pulled, different waysвҒ вҖ”and waxing rough,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had cuffed each other, only for the cuff.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңO, who can hold a fire in his hand,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Richard II.,</i> act i. sc. 3, lines 294, 295.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Having had some experience in my youth.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>Don Juan</i> will be known, <i>by and by</i>, for what it is intendedвҒ вҖ”a Satire on abuses in the present states of society, and not an eulogy of vice. It may be now and then voluptuous:вҒ вҖ”I canвҖҷt help that. Ariosto is worse. Smollett (see Lord Strutwell in vol. 2<sup>nd</sup> of <i>R</i>[<i>oderick</i>] <i>R</i>[<i>andom</i>][1793, pp. 119вҒ вҖ“вҒ 127]) ten times worse; and Fielding no better.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, December 25, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 155, 156.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide ante</i>, <a>p. 204, note 1</a>. вҖңIt seems hardly to admit of doubt, that the plain of Anatolia, watered by the Mender, and backed by a mountainous ridge, of which Kazdaghy is the summit, offers the precise territory alluded to by Homer. The long controversy, excited by Mr.В BryantвҖҷs publication, and since so vehemently agitated, would probably never have existed, had it not been for the erroneous maps of the country which, even to this hour, disgrace our geographical knowledge of that part of Asia.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Travels, etc.</i>, by E.D. Clarke, 1812, Part II. sect, i. p. 78.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pillar which records the battle of Ravenna is about two miles from the city, on the opposite side of the river to the road towards Forli. Gaston de Foix [(1489вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1512) Duc de Nemours, nephew of Louis XII.], who gained the battle, was killed in it: there fell on both sides twenty thousand men. The present state of the pillar and its site is described in the text.</p>
					<p>[Beyond the Porta Sisi, about two miles from Ravenna, on the banks of the Ronco, is a square pillar (<i>La Colonna de Francesi</i>), erected in 1557 by Pietro Cesi, president of Romagna, as a memorial of the battle gained by the combined army of Louis XII. and the Duke of Ferrara over the troops of Julius II. and the King of Spain, April 11 1512.вҒ вҖ”<i>Handbook of Northern Italy</i>, p. 548.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza lvii. line i, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 371, note i. See, too, Preface to the <i>Prophecy of Dante, ibid</i>., iv. 243.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Protects his tomb, but greater care is paid.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">With human ordure is it now defiled,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As if the peasantвҖҷs scorn this mode invented</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">To show his loathing of the thing he soiled.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Those sufferings once reserved for Hell alone.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Its fumes are frankincense; and were there nought</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Even of this vapour, still the chilling yoke</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of silence would not long be borne by Thought.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I have drunk deep of passions as they pass,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And dearly bought the bitter power to give.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See, for instance, WilsonвҖҷs review of <i>Don Juan</i>, in <i>BlackwoodвҖҷs Edinburgh Magazine</i>, August, 1819, vol. v. p. 512, <i>sq.</i>: вҖңTo confessвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to his Maker, and to weep over in secret agonies the wildest and most fantastic transgressions of heart and mind, is the part of a conscious sinner, in whom sin has not become the sole principle of life and action.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ But to lay bare to the eye of manвҒ вҖ”and of <i>woman</i>вҒ вҖ”all the hidden convulsions of a wicked spirit,вҖқ etc.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>What! must I go with Wordy to the cooks?</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">ReadвҒ вҖ”were it but your GrandmotherвҖҷs to vexвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let me not the only minstrel be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cut off from tasting your Castalian tea.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңI leave them to their daily вҖҳtea is ready,вҖҷ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Snug coterie, and literary lady.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Beppo</i>, stanza lxxvi. lines 7, 8, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 184, note.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The caged starling, by its repeated cry, вҖңI canвҖҷt get out! I canвҖҷt get out!вҖқ cured Yorick of his sentimental yearnings for imprisonment in the Bastille. See SterneвҖҷs <i>Sentimental Journey</i>, ed. 1804, pp. 100вҒ вҖ“вҒ 106.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his <i>Essay, Supplement to the Preface</i> (<i>Poems by William Wordsworth</i>, ed. 1820, iii. 315вҒ вҖ“вҒ 348), Wordsworth maintains that the appreciation of great poetry is a plant of slow growth, that immediate recognition is a mark of inferiority, or is to be accounted for by the presence of adventitious qualities: вҖңSo strange, indeed, are the obliquities of admiration, that they whose opinions are much influenced by authority will often be tempted to think that there are no fixed principles in human nature for this art to rest upon.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Away, then, with the senseless iteration of the word <i>popular!</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The voice that issues from this spirit [of human knowledge] is that <i>Vox Populi</i> which the Deity inspires. Foolish must he be who can mistake for this a local acclamation, or a transitory outcryвҒ вҖ”transitory though it be for years, local though from a Nation. Still more lamentable is his error who can believe that there is anything of divine infallibility in this clamour of that small though loud portion of the community ever governed by factitious influence, which under the name of the <span class="smcap">Public</span>, passes itself upon the unthinking for the <span class="smcap">People</span>.вҖқ Naturally enough Byron regarded this pronouncement as a taunt if not as a challenge. WordsworthвҖҷs noble appeal from a provincial to an imperial authority, from the present to the future, is not strengthened by the obvious reference to the popularity of contemporaries.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[SoutheyвҖҷs <i>Madoc in Wales, Poetical Works</i>, Part I. Canto V. Ed. 1838, v. 39.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Not having looked at many of that hue,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Nor gartersвҒ вҖ”save those of the вҖң<i>honi soit</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”which lie</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Round the Patrician legs which walk about,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The ornaments of levee and of rout.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Probably Lady Charlemont. See вҖңJournal,вҖқ November 22, 1813.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The cyanometer, an instrument for ascertaining the intensity of the blue colour of the sky, was invented by Horace BГ©nГ©dict de Saussure (1740вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1799); see his <i>Essai sur lвҖҷHygromГ©trie</i>. F.H. Alexander von Humboldt (1769вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1859) вҖңmade great use of his instrument on his voyages, and ascertained by the colour the degree of blueness, the accumulation and the nature of the non-transparent exhalations of the air.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Alexander von Humboldt</i>, by Professor Klencke, translated by Juliette Bauer, 1852, pp. 45, 46.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷll back a London вҖң<i>Bas</i>вҖқ against Peru.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷll bet some pair of stocking beat Peru.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And so, old Sotheby, weвҖҷll measure you.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe slave-market is a quadrangle, surrounded by a covered gallery, and ranges of small and separate apartments.вҖқ Here the poor wretches sit in a melancholy posture. вҖңBefore they cheapen вҖҷem, they turn вҖҷem about from this side to that, survey вҖҷem from top to bottom.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Such of вҖҷem, both men and women, to whom Dame Nature has been niggardly of her charms, are set apart for the vilest services: but such girls as have youth and beauty pass their time well enough.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The retailers of this human ware are the Jews, who take good care of their slavesвҖҷ education, that they may sell the better: their choicest they keep at home, and there you must go, if you would have better than ordinary; for вҖҷtis here, as вҖҷtis in markets for horses, the handsomest donвҖҷt always appear, but are kept within doors.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>A Voyage into the Levant</i>, by M. Tournefort, 1741, ii. 198, 199. See, too, for the description of the sale of two Circassians and one Georgian, <i>Voyage de Vienne Г  Belgrade</i>,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ par N.E. Kleeman, 1780, pp. 141, 142. The вҖңlowest offer for the prize Circassian was 4000 piastres.вҖқ] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The females stood, till chosen each as victim</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To the soft oath of вҖңAna seing Siktum!вҖқ[<b>*</b>]</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[<b>*</b> If the Turkish words are correctly given, вҖңthe oathвҖқ may be an imprecation on вҖңyour motherвҖҷsвҖқ chastity.] <a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For fear the Canto should become too long.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-4.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 5-->
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Canto V. was begun at Ravenna, October the 16th, and finished November the 20th, 1820. It was published August 8, 1821, together with Cantos III. and IV.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This expression of Homer has been much criticized. It hardly answers to our Atlantic ideas of the ocean, but is sufficiently applicable to the Hellespont, and the Bosphorus, with the Aegean intersected with islands.</p>
					<p>[<i>Vide</i> <i>Iliad</i>, xiv. 245, etc. HomerвҖҷs вҖңocean-streamвҖқ was not the Hellespont, but the rim of waters which encircled the disk of the world.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe pleasure of going in a barge to Chelsea is not comparable to that of rowing upon the canal of the sea here, where, for twenty miles together, down the Bosphorus, the most beautiful variety of prospects present themselves. The Asian side is covered with fruit trees, villages, and the most delightful landscapes in nature; on the European stands Constantinople, situated on seven hills; showing an agreeable mixture of gardens, pine and cypress trees, palaces, mosques, and public buildings, raised one above another, with as much beauty and appearance of symmetry as your ladyship ever saw in a cabinet adorned by the most skilful hands, where jars show themselves above jars, mixed with canisters, babies, and candlesticks. This is a very odd comparison: but it gives me an exact idea of the thing.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See letter to Mr.В Pope, No. xl. June 17, 1717, and letter to the Countess of Bristol, No. xlvi. n.d., <i>Letters of the Lady Mary Worthy Montagu,</i> 1816, pp. 183вҒ вҖ“вҒ 219. See, too, letter to Mrs.В Byron, June 28, 1810, <i>Letters,</i> 1890, i. 280, note 1.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For ByronвҖҷs вҖңMarys,вҖқ see <i>Poetical Works,</i> 1898, i. 192, note 2.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The вҖңGiantвҖҷs GraveвҖқ is a height on the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus, much frequented by holiday parties; like Harrow and Highgate.</p>
					<p>[вҖңThe GiantвҖҷs Mountain, 650 feet high, is almost exactly opposite BuyukderehвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It is called by the Turks Yoshadagh, <i>Mountain of Joshua,</i> because the <i>GiantвҖҷs Grave</i> on the top is, according to the Moslem legend, the grave of Joshua. The grave was formerly called the <i>Couch of Hercules;</i> but the classical story is that it was the tomb of Amycus, king of the Bebryces [on his grave grew the <i>laurus insana</i>, a branch of which caused strife (Plin., <i>Hist. Nat.,</i> lib. xvi. cap. xliv. ed. 1593, ii. 198)]. The grave is 20 feet long, and 5 feet broad; it is within a stone enclosure, and is planted with flowers and bushes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Handbook for Constantinople,</i> p. 103.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For then the Parca are most busy spinning</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The fates of seamen, and the loud winds raise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">That he a man of rank and birth had been,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And then they calculated on his ransom,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And last not leastвҒ вҖ”he was so very handsome.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>It chanced that near him, separately lotted,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">From out the group of slaves put up for sale,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A man of middle age, andвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The object of SuwarofвҖҷs campaign of 1789 was the conquest of Belgrade and Servia, that of Wallachia by the Austrians, etc. Neither of these plans succeeded.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>The Life of Field-Marshal Suwarof,</i> by L.M.P. Tranchant de Laverne, 1814, pp. 105, 106.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Turkish zecchino is a gold coin, worth about seven shillings and sixpence. The para is not quite equal to an English halfpenny.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CandideвҖҷs increased satisfaction with life is implied in the narrative. For example, in chap, xviii., where Candide visits Eldorado:вҒ вҖ”вҖңNever was there a better entertainment, and never was more wit shown at table than that which fell from His Majesty. Cacambo explained the kingвҖҷs <i>bons mots</i> to Candide, and notwithstanding they were translated, they still appeared <i>bons mots.</i>вҖқ This was after supper. See, too, Part II. chap, ii.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Plutarch in <i>Alex.</i>, Q. Curt. <i>Hist. Alexand.</i>, and Sir Richard ClaytonвҖҷs вҖңCritical Inquiry into the Life of Alexander the Great,вҖқ 1763 [from the <i>Examen Critique, etc.</i>, of Guilhem de Clermont-LodГЁve, Baron de Sainte Croix, 1775.]</p>
					<p>[вҖңHe used to say that sleep and the commerce with the sex were the things that made him most sensible of his mortality,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He was also very temperate in eating.вҖқвҒ вҖ”PlutarchвҖҷs <i>Alexander</i>, Langhorne, 1838, p. 473.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But for mere food, I think with PhilipвҖҷs son,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or AmmonвҖҷsвҒ вҖ”for two fathers claimed this one.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The assassination alluded to took place on the 8th of December, 1820, in the streets of Ravenna, not a hundred paces from the residence of the writer. The circumstances were as described.</p>
					<p>[вҖңDecember 9, 1820. I open my letter to tell you a fact, which will show the state of this country better than I can. The commandant of the troops is <i>now</i> lying <i>dead</i> in my house. He was shot at a little past eight oвҖҷclock, about two hundred paces from my door. I was putting on my great coat to visit Madame la Comtessa G., when I heard the shot. On coming into the hall, I found all my servants on the balcony, exclaiming that a man was murdered. I immediately ran down, calling on Tita (the bravest of them) to follow me. The rest wanted to hinder us from going, as it is the custom for everybody here, it seems, to run away from вҖҳthe stricken deer.вҖҷвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ we found him lying on his back, almost, if not quite, dead, with five wounds; one in the heart, two in the stomach, one in the finger, and the other in the arm. Some soldiers cocked their guns, and wanted to hinder me from passing. However, we passed, and I found Diego, the adjutant, crying over him like a childвҒ вҖ”a surgeon, who said nothing of his professionвҒ вҖ”a priest, sobbing a frightened prayerвҒ вҖ”and the commandant, all this time, on his back, on the hard, cold pavement, without light or assistance, or anything around him but confusion and dismay. As nobody could, or would, do anything but howl and pray, and as no one would stir a finger to move him, for fear of consequences, I lost my patienceвҒ вҖ”made my servant and a couple of the mob take up the bodyвҒ вҖ”sent off two soldiers to the guardвҒ вҖ”despatched Diego to the Cardinal with the news, and had him carried upstairs into my own quarters. But it was too lateвҒ вҖ”he was gone.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I had him partly strippedвҒ вҖ”made the surgeon examine him, and examined him myself. He had been shot by cut balls or slugs. I felt one of the slugs, which had gone through him, all but the skin.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He only said, вҖҳO Dio!вҖҷ and вҖҳGesu!вҖҷ two or three times, and appeared to have suffered little. Poor fellow! he was a brave officer; but had made himself much disliked by the people.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Moore, December 9, 1820, <i>Letters,</i> 1901, v. 133. The commandantвҖҷs name was Del Pinto (<i>Life,</i> p. 472).] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ so I had</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Him borne, as soonвҖҷs I could, up several pair</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of stairsвҒ вҖ”and looked to,вҒ вёәвҒ But why should I add</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">More circumstances?вҒ вёә.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And now as silent as an unstrung drum.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The light and elegant wherries plying about the quays of Constantinople are so called. <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Ilderim, a Syrian Tale</i>, by Henry Gally Knight, was published in 1816; <i>Phrosyne, a Grecian Tale</i>, and <i>Alashtar, an Arabian Tale</i>, in 1817. MooreвҖҷs <i>Lalla Kookh</i> also appeared in 1817.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[St.В Bartholomew was вҖңdiscoriate, and flayed quickвҖқ (<i>Golden Legend</i>, 1900, v. 43).] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>We from impalementвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңMany of the seraГҜ and summer-houses [on the Bosphorus] have received these significant, or rather fantastic names: one is the Pearl Pavilion; another is the Star Palace; a third the Mansion of Looking-glasses.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 243. <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of speeches, beauty, flatteryвҒ вҖ”there is no</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Method more sureвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Guide des Voyageurs</i>; <i>Directions for Travellers</i>, etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Rhymes, Incidental and Humorous</i>; <i>Rhyming Reminiscences</i>; <i>Effusions in Rhyme</i>, etc.вҒ вҖ”Lady MorganвҖҷs <i>Tour in Italy</i>; <i>Tour through Istria</i>, etc., etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Sketches of Italy</i>; <i>Sketches of Modern Greece</i>, etc., etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Historical Illustrations of the Fourth Canto of Childe Harold</i>, by J.C. Hobhouse, 1818.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Turkey nothing is more common than for the Mussulmans to take several glasses of strong spirits by way of appetiser. I have seen them take as many as six of raki before dinner, and swear that they dined the better for it: I tried the experiment, but fared like the Scotchman, who having heard that the birds called kittiwakes were admirable whets, ate six of them, and complained that вҖңhe was no hungrier than when he began.вҖқ <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңEverything is so still [in the court of the Seraglio], that the motion of a fly might be heard, in a manner; and if any one should presume to raise his voice ever so little, or show the least want of respect to the Mansion-place of their Emperor, he would instantly have the bastinado by the officers that go the rounds.вҖқ-<i>A Voyage in the Levant</i>, by M. Tournefort, 1741, ii. 183.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i>A common furniture. I recollect being received by Ali Pacha, in a large room, paved with marble, containing a marble basin, and fountain playing in the centre, etc., etc.</i>
					</p>
					<p>[Compare Childe Harold, Canto II. stanza lxii.вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңIn marble-paved pavilion, where a spring</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of living water from the centre rose,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Whose bubbling did a genial freshness fling,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And soft voluptuous couches breathed repose,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Ali reclined, a man of war and woes,вҖқ etc.]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[A reminiscence of Newstead. Compare MooreвҖҷs song, вҖңOft in the Stilly NightвҖқвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i4">вҖңI feel like one</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i4">Who treads alone</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Some banquet-hall deserted.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A small, snug chamber on a winterвҖҷs night,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Well furnished with a book, friend, girl, or glass, etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I pass my days in long dull galleries solely.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[When this stanza was written Byron was domiciled in the Palazzo Guiccioli (in the Via di Porta Adriana) at Ravenna; but he may have had in his mind the monksвҖҷ refectory at Newstead Abbey, вҖңthe dark gallery, where his fathers frownedвҖқ (<i>Lara</i>, Canto I. line 137), or the corridors which form the upper story of the cloisters.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңNabuch<i>o</i>donosor,вҖқ here used <i>metri gratiГў</i>, is Latin (see the Vulgate) and French (see J.P. De BГ©ranger, <i>Chansons InГ©dites</i>, 1828, p. 48) for Nebuchadnezzar.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See OvidвҖҷs <i>Metamorphoses</i>, lib. iv. lines 55вҒ вҖ“вҒ 58вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңIn Babylon, where first her queen, for state,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Raised walls of brick magnificently great,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lived Pyramus and Thisbe, lovely pair!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He found no Eastern youth his equal there,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And she beyond the fairest nymph was fair.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Garth.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Babylon was enlarged by Nimrod, strengthened and beautified by Nabuchadonosor, and rebuilt by Semiramis.</p>
					<p>[Pliny (<i>Nat. Hist.</i>, lib. viii. cap. xlii. ed. 1593, i. 392) cites Juba, King of Mauretania, died A.D. 19, as his authority for the calumny.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In an Erratum of her Horse for Courier.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Queen CarolineвҒ вҖ”whose trial (AugustвҒ вҖ”November, 1820) was proceeding whilst this canto was being writtenвҒ вҖ”was charged with having committed adultery with Bartolommeo Bergami, who had been her courier, and was, afterwards, her chamberlain.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>Memoir on the Ruins of Babylon</i>, by Claudius James Rich, Esq., Resident for the Honourable East India Company at the Court of the Pasha of Bagdad, 1815,вҖқ pp. 61вҒ вҖ“вҒ 64: <i>Second Memoir on Babylon,</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ 1818, by Claudius James Rich. See the plates at the end of the volume.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>If they shall not as soon cut off my head.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A pair of drawersвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare вҖңExtracts from a Diary,вҖқ January 24, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 184.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Kings are not more imperative than rhymes.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He looked almost in modesty a maid.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Features</i> of a gateвҒ вҖ”a ministerial metaphor: вҖңthe <i>feature</i> upon which this question <i>hinges</i>.вҖқ See the вҖңFudge Family,вҖқ or hear Castlereagh.</p>
					<p>[Phil. Fudge, in his letter to Lord Castlereagh, saysвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңAs <i>thou</i> wouldвҖҷst say, my guide and teacher</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">In these gay metaphoric fringes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I must <i>embark</i> into the <i>feature</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">On which this letter chiefly <i>hinges</i>.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>MooreвҖҷs note adds, вҖңVerbatim from one of the noble ViscountвҖҷs speeches:вҒ вҖ”вҖҷ<i>And now, sir, I must embark into the</i> feature <i>on which this question chiefly hinges</i>.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Fudge Family in Paris</i>, Letter II. See, too, <i>post</i>, the <a>Preface to Cantos VI., VII., and VIII.</a>, <a>p. 264, note 3</a>.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i2">вҖңA snakeвҖҷs small eye blinks dull and sly,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the ladyвҖҷs eyes they shrunk in her head,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Each shrunk up to a serpentвҖҷs eye.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Christabel</i>, Part II. lines 583вҒ вҖ“вҒ 585.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few years ago the wile of Muchtar Pacha complained to his father of his sonвҖҷs supposed infidelity: he asked with whom, and she had the barbarity to give in a list of the twelve handsomest women in Yanina. They were seized, fastened up in sacks, and drowned in the lake the same night. One of the guards who was present informed me, that not one of the victims uttered a cry, or showed a symptom of terror at so sudden a вҖңwrench from all we know, from all we love.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[See <i>The Giaour</i>, line <i>1328, Poetical Works, 1900</i>, iii. 144, note 1.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">As Venus rose from OceanвҒ вҖ”bent on them</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With a far-reaching glance, a Paphian pair.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But there are forms which Time adorns, not wears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And to which Beauty obstinately clings.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Legend has credited Ninon de Lenclos (1620вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1705) with lovers when she had вҖңcome to four-score years.вҖқ According to Voltaire, John Casimir, ex-king of Poland, succumbed to her secular charms (see <i>Mazeppa</i>, line 138, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 212, note 1). вҖңIn her old age, her house was the rendezvous of wits and men of letters. Scarron is said to have consulted her on his romances, Saint-Evremond on his poems, MoliГЁre on his comedies, Fontenelle on his dialogues, and La Rochefoucauld on his maxims. Coligny, SГ©vignГ©, etc., were her lovers and friends. At her death, in 1705, she bequeathed to Voltaire two thousand francs, to expend in books.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Biographic Universelle</i>, art. вҖңLenclos.вҖқ] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHer fair maids were ranged below the sofa, to the number of twenty, and put me in mind of the pictures of the ancient nymphs. I did not think all nature could have furnished such a scene of beauty,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”Lady M.W. Montagu to the Countess of Mar, April 18, O.S. 1717, ed. 1816, p. 163.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңNil admirari prope res est una, Numici,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Solaque quГҰ possit facere et servare beatum.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Hor., <i>Epist.</i>, lib. 1, ep. vi. lines 1, 2.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңNot to admire, is all the Art I know</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make men happy, and to keep them so,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(Plain Truth, dear <b>Murray</b>, needs no flowвҖҷrs of speech,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So take it in the very words of Creech).вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>To Mr.В Murray</i> (Lord Mansfield), PopeвҖҷs <i>Imitations of Horace</i>, Book I. epist. vi. lines 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 4.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Thomas Creech (1659вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1701) published his <i>Translation of Horace</i> in 1684. In the second edition, 1688, p. 487, the lines runвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңNot to admire, as most are wont to do,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It is the only method that I know,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make Men happy and to keep вҖҷem so.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Johnson placed judgment and friendship above admiration and love. вҖңAdmiration and love are like being intoxicated with champagne; judgment and friendship like being enlivened.вҖқ See BoswellвҖҷs <i>Life of Johnson</i>, 1876, p. 450.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is nothing, perhaps, more distinctive of birth than the hand. It is almost the only sign of blood which aristocracy can generate. <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In old pictures of the Fall, it is a cherub who whispers into the ear of Eve. The serpentвҖҷs coils are hidden in the foliage of the tree.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The very women half forgave her face.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Had his instructionsвҒ вҖ”where and how to deal.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And husbands now and then are mystified.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Narrow javelins, once known as archegaysвҒ вҖ”the assegais of Zulu warfare.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But nature teaches what power cannot spoil</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And, though it was a new and strange sensation,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Young female hearts are such a genial soil</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">For kinder feelings, she forgot her station.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>War with your heartвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>FieldingвҖҷs History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews</i>, bk. i. chap. v.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңвҖҠвҖҳBut if my boy with virtue be endued,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What harm will beauty do him?вҖҷ Nay, what good?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Say, what availвҖҷd, of old, to TheseusвҖҷ son,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The stern resolve? what to Bellerophon?вҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O, then did Phaedra redden, then her pride</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Took fire to be so steadfastly denied!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then, too, did Sthenobaea glow with shame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And both burst forth with unextinguishвҖҷd flame!вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Gifford, <i>Juvenal</i>, Sat. x. 473вҒ вҖ“вҒ 480.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The adventures of Hippolytus, the son of Theseus, and Bellerophon are well known. They were accused of incontinence, by the women whose inordinate passions they had refused to gratify at the expense of their duty, and sacrificed to the fatal credulity of the husbands of the disappointed fair ones. It is very probable that both the stories are founded on the Scripture account of Joseph and PotipharвҖҷs wife.вҒ вҖ”Footnote, ibid., ed. 1817, ii. pp. 49, 50.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The poets and romancesвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And this strong second cause (to tire no longer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Your patience) shows the first must still be stronger.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңBy Heaven! methinks, it were an easy leap,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Henry IV</i>., act i. sc. 3, lines 201, 202.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like natural Shakespeare on the immortal page.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңAnd when I have stolвҖҷn upon these sons-in law,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>King Lear</i>, act iv. sc. 6, lines 185, 186.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңA woman scornвҖҷd is pitiless as fate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For, there, the dread of shame adds stings to hate.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>GiffordвҖҷs <i>Juvenal, Sat</i>. x. lines 481, 482, ed. 1817, ii. p. 50.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңYesвҒ вҖ”my valour is certainly going! it is sneaking off! I feel it <i>oozing</i> out, as it were, at the palms of my hands!вҖқвҒ вҖ”SheridanвҖҷs <i>Rivals</i>, act v. sc. 3.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Or all the stuff which uttered by the вҖңBluesвҖқ is.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But pritheeвҒ вҖ”get my women in the way,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">That all the stars may gleam with due adorning.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of Cantemir or KnollД“sвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may not be unworthy of remark, that Bacon, in his essay on вҖңEmpireвҖқ (Essays, No. xx.), hints that Solyman was the last of his line; on what authority, I know not. These are his words: вҖңThe destruction of Mustapha was so fatal to SolymanвҖҷs line; as the succession of the Turks from Solyman until this day is suspected to be untrue, and of strange blood; for that Selymus the second was thought to be supposititious.вҖқ But Bacon, in his historical authorities, is often inaccurate. I could give half a dozen instances from his Apophthegms only.</p>
					<p>[Selim II. (1524вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1574) succeeded his father as Sultan in 1566. Hofmann (<i>Lexicon Univ</i>.) describes him as вҖңmeticulosus, effeminatus, ebriosus,вҖқ but neither Demetrius Cantemir, in his <i>History of the Growth and Decay of the Othman Empire</i> (translated by N. Tyndal, 1734); nor <i>The Turkish History</i> (written by Mr.В Knolles, 1701), cast any doubts on his legitimacy. Byron complained of the omission from the notes to the first edition of Don Juan, of his corrections of BaconвҖҷs вҖңApophthegmsвҖқ (see <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. Appendix VI. pp. 597вҒ вҖ“вҒ 600), in a letter to Murray, dated January 21, 1821вҒ вҖ”<i>vide ibid</i>., p. 220.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Gibbon.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Because he kept them wrapt up in his closet, he</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ruled fair wives and twelve hundred whores, unseen,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More easily than Christian kings one queen.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Then ended many a fair SultanaвҖҷs trip:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The Public knew no more than does this rhyme;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No printed scandals flewвҒ вҖ”the fish, of course,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Were betterвҒ вҖ”while the morals were no worse.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>No sign of its depression anywhere.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe attempted to visit the Seven Towers, but were stopped at the entrance, and informed that without a firman it was inaccessible to strangers.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It was supposed that Count Bulukof, the Russian minister, would be the last of the <i>Moussafirs</i>, or imperial hostages, confined in this fortress; but since the year 1784В M. Ruffin and many of the French have been imprisoned in the same place; and the dungeonsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ were gaping, it seems, for the sacred persons of the gentlemen composing his Britannic MajestyвҖҷs mission, previous to the rupture between Great Britain and the Porte in 1809.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Hobhouse, <i>Travels in Albania</i>, 1858, ii. 311, 312.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe princessвҖқ (Asma Sultana, daughter of Achmet III.) вҖңcomplained of the barbarity which, at thirteen years of age, united her to a decrepit old man, who, by treating her like a child, had inspired her with nothing but disgust.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Memoirs of Baron de Toil</i>, 1786, i. 74. See, too, <i>MГ©moires</i>, etc., 1784, i. 84, 85.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The connection between вҖңhornsвҖқ and Heaven, to which Byron twice alludes, is not very obvious. The reference may be to the Biblical вҖңhorn of salvation,вҖқ or to the symbolical horns of Divine glory as depicted in the Moses of Michel Angelo. Compare <i>Mazeppa</i>, lines 177, 178, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 213.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ with solemn air and wise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Virginity in these unhappy climes.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[This stanza, which Byron composed in bed, February 27, 1821 (see <i>Extracts from a Diary, Letters</i>, 1901, v. 209), is not in the first edition. On discovering the omission, he wrote to Murray: вҖңUpon what principle have you omittedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ one of the concluding stanzas sent as an addition?вҒ вҖ”because it ended, I suppose, withвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖҳAnd do not link two virtuous souls for life</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Into that moral centaur, man and wife?вҖҷ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Now, I must say, once for all, that I will not permit any human being to take such liberties with my writings because I am absent. I desire the omissions to be replaced (except the stanza on Semiramis)вҒ вҖ”particularly the stanza upon the Turkish marriages.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, August 31, 1821, ibid., p. 351.] <a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Meanwhile as Homer sometimes sleeps, much more</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The modern muse may be allowed to snore.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-5.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 6-->
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Two MSS. (A, B) are extant, A in ByronвҖҷs handwriting, B a transcription by Mrs.В Shelley. The variants are marked respectively <i>MS. A., MS. B.</i></p>
					<p>Motto: вҖңThinkest thou that because thou art virtuous there shall be no more cakes and ale? Aye! and ginger shall be hot in the mouth too.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Twelfth Night, or What You Will</i>, Shakespeare, act ii. sc. 3, lines 109вҒ вҖ“вҒ 112.вҒ вҖ”[<i>MS. B.</i>]</p>
					<p>This motto, in an amended form, which was prefixed to the First Canto in 1833, appears on the title-page of the first edition of Cantos VI., VII., VIII., published by John Hunt in 1823.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See Shakespeare, <i>Julius CГҰsar</i>, act iv. sc. 3, lines 216, 217.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Jacob Behmen (or Boehm) stands for вҖңmystic.вҖқ Byron twice compares him with Wordsworth (see <i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 239, 1900, iv. 238).] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Man with his head reflects (as Spurzheim tells),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Woman with the heartвҒ вҖ”or something else.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>ManвҖҷs pensive part is (now and then) the head,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>WomanвҖҷs the heart or anything instead.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like to a CometвҖҷs tailвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>OвҖҷerbalance all the CГҰsarвҖҷs victories.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Outbalance all the CГҰsarвҖҷs victories.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p><i>In the Shelley copy вҖңoвҖҷerbalanceвҖқ has been erased and вҖңoutbalanceвҖқ inserted in ByronвҖҷs handwriting. The lines must have been intended to run thus</i>вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">вҖҳT is not his conquests keep his name in fashion</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Actium lost; for CleopatraвҖҷs eyes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Outbalance all the CГҰsarвҖҷs victories.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I wish that they had been eighteenвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[To Mary Chaworth. Compare вҖңOur union would have healed feudsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ it would have joined lands broad and rich; it would have joined at least <i>one</i> heart.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Detached Thoughts</i>, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 441.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Cato gave up his wife Martia to his friend Hortensius; but, on the death of the latter, took her back again. This conduct was censured by CГҰsar, who observed that Cato had an eye to the main chance. вҖңIt was the wealth of Hortensius. He lent the young man his wife, that he might make her a rich widow.вҖқвҒ вҖ”LanghorneвҖҷs Plutarch, 1838, pp. 539, 547.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Othello</i>, act i. sc. i, lines 19вҒ вҖ“вҒ 24.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ though with greater latitude.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ with one foolish woman wed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The famous <i>bed</i>, measuring twelve feet square, to which an allusion is made by Shakespeare in <i>Twelfth Night</i>, act iii. sc. 2, line 44, was formerly preserved at the SaracenвҖҷs Head at Ware, in Hertfordshire. The bed was removed from Ware to the Rye House in 1869.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>His Highness the sublimest of mankind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The greatest, wisest, bravest, [and the] best,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Proved by his edicts somewhat blind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Who saw his virtues as they saw the restвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His Highness quite connubially inclined</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Had deigned that night to be GulbeyazвҖҷ guest.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Waverley [chap. xx.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>May look like what I need not mention here</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Are better signs if such things can be signed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For St.В Francis of Assisi, and the вҖңseven great balls of snow,вҖқ of which вҖңthe greatestвҖқ was вҖңhis wife,вҖқ see <i>The Golden Legend</i>, 1900, v. 221, <i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 32, note 1</a>.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The words <i>medio</i>, etc., are to be found in Ovid., <i>Metam.</i>, lib. ii. line 137; the doctrine, <i>Virtus est medium vitiorum</i>, in Horace, <i>Epist</i>., lib. i, ep. xviii. line 9.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In the damned line (вҖҳt is worth, at least, a curse)</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Which I have examined too close.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Self-love that whetstone of Don CupidвҖҷs art.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ with love despairs.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lady NoelвҖҷs will was proved February 22, 1812. She left to the trustees a portrait of ByronвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ with directions that it was not to be shown to his daughter Ada till she attained the age of twenty-one; but that if her mother was still living, it was not to be so delivered without Lady ByronвҖҷs consent.вҒ вҖ”<i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 42, note 1.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which diddles youвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>IвҖҷm a philosopher; GвҒ вҖ”d damn them all.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Bills, women, wives, dogs, horses and mankind.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Is more than I know, and, so, damn them both.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>When we lie downвҒ вҖ”wife, spouse, or bachelor</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">By what we love not, to sigh for the light.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>By their infernal bedfellowвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-539" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The comparison of Queen Caroline to snow may be traced to an article in the <i>Times</i> of August 23, 1820: вҖңThe Queen may now, we believe, be considered as triumphing! For the first three years at least of her MajestyвҖҷs painful peregrinations, she stands before her husbandвҖҷs admiring subjects вҖҳas white as unsunned snows.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқ Political bards and lampoonists of the kingвҖҷs party thanked the <i>Times</i> for вҖңgiving them that word.вҖқ] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-540" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[According to Gronow (<i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, i. 62), a practical joke of Dan MackinnonвҖҷs (<i>vide ante</i>, <a><i>p. 69, footnote</i></a>) gave Byron a hint for this scene in the harem: вҖңLord Wellington was curious about visiting a convent near Lisbon, and the lady abbess made no difficulty. Mackinnon hearing this contrived to get clandestinely within the sacred wallsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ at all events, when Lord Wellington arrived Dan Mackinnon was to be seen among the nuns, dressed out in their sacred costume, with his whiskers shaved; and, as he possessed good features, he was declared to be one of the best-looking among those chaste dames. It was supposed that this adventure, which was known to Lord Byron, suggested a similar episode in <i>Don Juan</i>.вҖқ] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CaligulaвҒ вҖ”<i>vide</i> Suetonius, <i>De XII. CГҰs</i>., C. <i>CГҰs</i>. Calig., cap, xxx., вҖңInfensus turbГҰ faventi adversus studium exclamavit: вҖҳUtinam populus Romanus unam cervicem haberet!вҖҷвҖҠвҖқ] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>My wish were general but no worse.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That Womankind had only oneвҒ вҖ”say heart.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ladies of the Seraglio. <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Demetrius Cantemir, hospodar of Moldavia. His work, the <i>History of the Growth and Decay of the Othman Empire</i>, was translated into English by N. Tyndal, 1734. He died in 1723.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Baron de Tott, in his <i>Memoirs concerning the State of the Turkish Empire</i> (1786, i. 72), gives the title of this functionary as <i>Kiaya Kadun</i>, i.e. Mistress or Governess of the Ladies.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The repetition of the same rhyme-word was noted in <i>BlackwoodвҖҷs Edinburgh Magazine</i>, July, 1823, vol. xiv. p. 90.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңI guess, вҖҳt was frightful there to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A lady so richly clad as sheвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beautiful exceedingly.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Christabel</i>, Part I. lines 66вҒ вҖ“вҒ 68.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңIt is in the adjacent climates of Georgia, Mingrelia, and Circassia, that nature has placed, at least to our eyes, the model of beauty, in the shape of the limbs, the colour of the skin, the symmetry of the features, and the expression of the countenance: the men are formed for action, the women for love.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Gibbon, [<i>Decline and Fall, etc.</i>, 1825, iii 126.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Padisha is the Turkish title of the Grand Signior. <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Katinka was the name of the youngest sister of Theresa, the вҖңMaid of Athens.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See letter to H. Drury, May 3, 1810, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 269, note 1; and <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 15, note 1.</p>
					<p>It is probable that the originals of Katinka and DudГ№ were two Circassians who were presented for sale to Nicolas Ernest Kleeman (see his <i>Voyage de Vienne, etc.</i>, 1780, pp. 142, 143) at Kaffa, in the Crimea. Of the first he writes, вҖңElle me baisa la main, et par lвҖҷordre de son maГ®tre, elle se promena en long et en large, pour me faire remarquer sa taille mince et aisГ©e. Elle avoit un joli petit pied.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Quand elle a en ГҙtГ© son voile elle a prГ©sentГ© Г  mes yeux une beautГ© trГЁs-attrayante; ses cheveux Г©toient blonds argentГ©s; elle avoit de grands yeux bleux, le nez un peu long, et les lГЁvres appГ©tissantes. Sa figure Г©toit rГ©guliГЁre, son teint blanc, dГ©licat, les joues couvertes dвҖҷun charmant vermilion.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ La seconde Г©toit un peu petite, assez grasse, et avoit les cheveux roux, lвҖҷair sensuel et revenant.вҖқ Kleeman pretended to offer terms, took notes, and retired. But the Circassians are before us still.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Macbeth</i>, act ii. sc. 2, line 36.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>By which no doubt its Baptism came to pass.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The Devil in Hell might melt but never settle.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hence the title of the satire, <i>The Age of Bronze</i>.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For WomanвҖҷs silence startles more than thunder.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Beppo</i>, stanza xxii. line 2, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 166, note 1.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With no less true and feminine surprise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Julius CГҰsar</i>, act iii. sc. II, line 216.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңNel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Inferno</i>, Canto I, lines I, 2.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Himself in an age when men grow good,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As LifeвҖҷs best half is doneвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But out of reachвҒ вҖ”a most provoking sight.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That ere her unreluctant lips could ope.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[One of the advocates employed for Queen Caroline in the House of Lords spoke of some of the most puzzling passages in the history of her intercourse with Bergami, as amounting to вҖңodd instances of strange coincidence.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Ed. 1833, xvi. 160.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>At least as red as the FlamingoвҖҷs breast.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron used Kaff for Caucasus, <i>vide ante</i>, <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, line 1022, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 378, note 3. But there may be some allusion to the fabulous Kaff, вҖңanciently imagined by the Asiatics to surround the world, to bind the horizon on all sides.вҖқ There was a proverb вҖңFrom Kaf to Kaf,вҖқ <i>i.e.</i> вҖңthe wide world through.вҖқ See, too, DвҖҷHerbelotвҖҷs <i>BibliothГЁque Orientale</i>, 1697, art. вҖңCaf.вҖқ] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See L.A. Seneca, <i>De IrГў</i>, lib. ii. cap. 25.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Oh thou her lawful grandson Alexander</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Let not this quality offendвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, lines 434, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 563, note 1.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To call a man a whoresonвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But a manвҖҷs grandmother is deemed fair game.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[It is probable that Byron knew that there was a вҖңhint of illegitimacyвҖқ in his own pedigree. John Byron of Clayton, grandfather of Richard the second Lord Byron, was born, out of wedlock, to Elizabeth, daughter of William Costerden, of Blakesley, in Lancashire, widow to George Halgh of Halgh (<i>sic</i>), and second wife of Sir John Byron of Clayton, вҖңlittle Sir John with the great beard.вҖқ He succeeded to Newstead and the Lancashire estates, not as heir-at-law, but by deed of gift. (See letter to Murray, October 20, 1820, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 99, note 2.)] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Aubry de la Motraye, in describing the interior of the Grand SigniorвҖҷs palace, into which he gained admission as the assistant of a watchmaker who was employed to regulate the clocks, says that the eunuch who received them at the entrance of the harem, conducted them into a hall: вҖңCette salle est incrustee de porcelaines fines; et le lambris dorГ© et azurГ© qui orne le fond dвҖҷune coupole qui regne au-dessus, est des plus riches.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Une fontaine artificielle et jaillissante, dont le bassin est dвҖҷun prГ©tieux marbre verd qui mвҖҷa paru serpentin ou jaspe, sвҖҷГ©levoit directement au milieu, sous le dГҙme.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Je me trouvai la tГӘte si pleine de <i>Sophas</i> de prГ©tieux plafonds, de meubles superbes, en un mot, dвҖҷune si grande confusion de matГ©riaux magnifiques,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ quвҖҷil seroit difficile dвҖҷen donner une idГ©e claire.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Voyages</i>, 1727, i. 220, 222.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIl nвҖҷya point de ReligieusesвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ point de novices, plus soumises Г  la volontГ© de leur abbesse que ces filles [les Odaliques] le sont Г  leurs maitresses.вҖқвҒ вҖ”A. de la Motraye, <i>Voyages,</i> 1727, i. 338.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вё»though seen not heard</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For it is silent.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHow fares my Kate? What! sweeting, all amort?вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Taming of the Shrew,</i> act iv. sc. 3, line 36. вҖңAmortвҖқ is said to be a corruption of <i>Г  la mort</i>. Byron must have had in mind his silent ecstasy of grief when the Countess Guiccioli endeavoured to break the announcement of AllegraвҖҷs death (April, 1822). вҖңвҖҠвҖҳI understand,вҖҷ said he; вҖҳit is enough; say no more.вҖҷ A mortal paleness spread itself over his face, his strength failed him, and he sunk into a seat. His look was fixed, and the expression such that I began to fear for his reason; he did not shed a tearвҖқ (<i>Life,</i> p. 368).] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHis guilty soul, at enmity with gods and men, could find no rest; so violently was his mind torn and distracted by a consciousness of guilt. Accordingly his countenance was pale, his eyes ghastly, his pace one while quick, another slow [citus modo, modo tardus incessus]; indeed, in all his looks there was an air of distraction.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Sallust, <i>Catilina</i>, cap. xv. sf.] <a href="canto-6.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 7-->
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThese [the seventh and eighth] Cantos contain a full detail (like the storm in Canto Second) of the siege and assault of Ismael, with much of sarcasm on those butchers in large business, your mercenary soldiery.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ With these things and these fellows it is necessary, in the present clash of philosophy and tyranny, to throw away the scabbard. I know it is against fearful odds; but the battle must be fought; and it will be eventually for the good of mankind, whatever it may be for the individual who risks himself.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Moore, August 8, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 101.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron attributes this phrase to Orator Henley (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 227); and to Bayes in the Duke of BuckinghamвҖҷs play, <i>The Rehearsal</i> (<i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 80).] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of Fenelon, of Calvin and of Christ.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto II. stanza vii. line 1, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 103, note 2.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Picking a pebble on the shore of Truth.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңSir Isaac Newton, a little before he died, said, вҖҳI donвҖҷt know what I may seem to the world; but, as to myself, I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”Spence, <i>Anecdotes</i> (quoting Chevalier Ramsay), 1858, p. 40.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>From fools who dread to know the truth of Life.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare вҖңInscription on the Monument of a Newfoundland Dog,вҖқ lines 7, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 280.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Aleksandr Vasilievitch SuvГіroff (1729вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1800) opened his attack on Ismail, November 30, 1790. His forces, including Kossacks, exceeded 27,000В men.вҒ вҖ”<i>Essai sur lвҖҷHistoire Ancienne et Moderne de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, par le Marquis Gabriel de Castelnau, 1827, ii. 201.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIsmaГ«l est situГ© sur la rive gauche du bras gauche (i.e. the ilia) du Danube.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҒ вёәвҖқГ  peu prГЁs Г  quatre-vingts verstes de la mer: elle a prГЁs de trois milles toises de tour.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 201.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn a compris dans ces fortifications un faubourg moldave, situГ© Г  la gauche de la ville, sur une hauteur qui la domine: lвҖҷouvrage a Г©tГ© terminГ© par un Grec. Pour donner une idГ©e des talens de cet ingГ©nieur, il suffira de dire quвҖҷil fit placer les palissades perpendiculairement sur le parapet, de maniГЁre quвҖҷelles favorisaient les assiГ©geans, et arrГӘtaient le feu des assiГ©gГ©s.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 202.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe rempart en terre est prodigieusement Г©levГ© Г  cause de lвҖҷimmense profondeur du fossГ©; il est cependant absolument rasant: il nвҖҷy a ni ouvrage avancГ©, ni chemin couvert.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 202.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Casemate is a work made under the rampart, like a cellar or cave, with loopholes to place guns in it, and is bomb proof.вҒ вҖ”<i>Milit. Dict.</i>] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[When the breastwork of a battery is only of such height that the guns may fire over it without being obliged to make embrasures, the guns are said to fire in barbet.вҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңUn bastion de pierres, ouvert par une gorge trГЁs-Г©troite, et dont les murailles son fort Г©paisses, a une batterie casematГ©e et une Г  barbette; il dГ©fend la rive du Danube. Du cГҙtГ© droit de la ville est un cavalier de quarante pieds dвҖҷГ©lГ©vation Г  pic, garni de vingt-deux piГЁces de canon, et qui dГ©fend la partie gauche.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 202.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңDu cГҙtГ© du fleuve, la ville est absolument ouverte; les Turcs ne croyaient pas que les Russes pussent jamais avoir une flotille dans le Danube.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Meknop [supposed to be a corruption of McNab], etc., in line three, are real names: Strongenoff stands for Strogonof, Tschitsshakoff for Tchitchagof, and, perhaps, Chokenoff for Tchoglokof.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ these discords of damnation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa premiГЁre attaque Г©tait composГ©e de trois colonnes, commandГ©es par les lieutenans-generaux Paul Potiemkin, Serge Lwow, les gГ©nГ©raux-majors Maurice Lascy, ThГ©odore Meknop.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Trois autres colonnesвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ avaient pour chefs le comte de SamoГҜlow, les gГ©nГ©raux ГҠlie de Bezborodko, Michel Koutousow; les brigadiers Orlow, Platow, Ribaupierre.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ La troisiГЁme attaque par eau nвҖҷavait que deux colonnes, sous les ordres des gГ©nГ©raux-majors Ribas et ArsГ©niew, des brigadiers Markoff et TchГ©pГ©ga,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 207.</p>
					<p>CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңOscharoffsky and Rostoffsky,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all the others that end in-offsky.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="elision">вӢ®</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Kutousoff he cut them off,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>SoutheyвҖҷs <i>March to Moscow</i>, 1813.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Count Boris Petrowitch Scheremetov, Russian general, died 1819; Prince Alexis Borisovitch Kourakin (1759вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1829), and Count Alexis Iwanowitch Moussine-Pouschkine (1744вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1817) were distinguished statesmen; Chrematoff is, perhaps, a rhyming double of Scherematoff, and Koklophti вҖңa match-pieceвҖқ to Koclobski.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Captain Smith, in the songвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңA Captain bold, in Halifax,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That dwelt in country quarters,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>SeducвҖҷd a maid who hangвҖҷd herself</span>
							<br/>
							<span>One Monday in her garters.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>See George ColmanвҖҷs farce, <i>Love Laughs at Locksmiths</i>, 1818, p. 31.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i8">вҖңWhile to my shame I see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The imminent death of twenty thousand men,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That for a fantasy and trick of fame</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go to their graves like beds.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Hamlet</i>, act iv. sc. 4, lines 56вҒ вҖ“вҒ 59.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The Conquest seemed not difficultвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn sвҖҷГ©tait proposГ© deux buts Г©galement avantageux, par la construction de deux batteries sur lвҖҷГ®le qui avoisine IsmaГ«l: le premier, de bombarder la place, dвҖҷen abattre les principaux Г©difices avec du canon de quarante-huit, effet dвҖҷautant plus probable, que la ville Г©tant bГўtie en amphithГ©Гўtre, presque aucun coup ne serait perdu.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe second objet Г©tait de profiter de ce moment dвҖҷalarme pour que la flottille, agissant en mГӘme temps, put dГ©truire celle des Turcs. Un troisiГЁme motif, et vraisemblablement le plus plausible, Г©tait de jeter la consternation parmi les Turcs, et de les engager Г  capituler.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Unless they are as game as bull-dogs or even tarriers.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A thing which sometimes hath occurred to warriors,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unless they happened to be as game as tarriers.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. A. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Unless they are Game as bull-dogs or even terriers.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>(Byron erased the reading of MS. B. and superscribed the reading of the text.) <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңUne habitude blГўmable, celle de mГ©priser son ennemi, fut la cause.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ du dГ©faut de perfection dans la construction des batteries; on voulait agir promptement, et on nГ©gligea de donner aux ouvrages la soliditГ© quвҖҷils exigaient.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe mГӘme esprit fit manquer lвҖҷeffet de trois brГ»lots; on calcula mal la distance; on se pressa dвҖҷallumer la mГ©che, ils brГ»lГЁrent au milieu du fleuve, et quoiquвҖҷil fГ»t six heures du matin, les Turcs, encore couchГ©s, nвҖҷen prirent aucun ombrage.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 203.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң1<sup>er</sup> Dec. 1790. La flottille russe sвҖҷavanГ§a vers les sept heures; il en Г©tait neuf lorsquвҖҷelle se trouva Г  cinquante toises de la ville [dвҖҷIsmaГ«l]: elle souffrit, avec une constance calme, un feu de mitraille et de mousqueterie.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ prГЁs de six heuresвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ les batteries de terre secondaient la flottille; mais on reconnut alors que les canonnades ne suffiraient pas pour rГ©duire la place, on fit la retraite Г  une heure. Un lanГ§on sauta pendant lвҖҷaction, un autre dГ©riva par la force du courant, et fut pris par lвҖҷennemi.вҖқвҖҠвҖҷвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 204.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For Delhis, see <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii., note 1.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLes Turcs perdirent beaucoup de monde et plusieurs vaisseaux. A peine la retraite des Russes fut-elle remarquГ©e, que les plus braves dвҖҷentre les ennemis se jetГЁrent dans de petites barques et essayГЁrent une descente: le Comte de Damas les mit en fuite, et leur tua plusieurs officiers et grand nombre de soldats.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, p. 204.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn ne tarirait pas si on voulait rapporter tout ce que les Russes firent de mГ©morable dans cette journГ©e; pour conter les hauts faits dвҖҷarmes, pour particulariser toutes les actions dвҖҷГ©clat, il faudrait composer des volumes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңParmi les Г©trangers, le prince de Ligne se distingua de maniГЁre Г  mГ©riter lвҖҷestime gГ©nГ©rale; de vrais chevaliers franГ§ais, attirГ©s par lвҖҷamour de la gloire, se montrГЁrent dignes dвҖҷelle: les plus marquans Г©taient le jeune Duc de Richelieu, les Comtes de Langeron et de Damas.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 204.</p>
					<p>Andrault, Comte de Langeron, born at Paris, January 13, 1763, on the outbreak of the Revolution (1790) took service in the Russian Army. He fought against the Swedes in 1790, and the Turks in 1791, and, after serving as a volunteer in the army of the Duke of Brunswick (1792вҒ вҖ“вҒ 93), returned to Russia, and was raised to the rank of general in 1799. He commanded a division of the Russian Army in the German campaign of 1813, and entered Paris with BlГјcher, March 30, 1814. He was afterwards Governor of Odessa and of New Russia; and, a second time, fought against the Turks in 1828. He died at St.В Petersburg, July 4, 1831. Joseph Elizabeth Roger, Comte de Damas dвҖҷAntigny, born at Paris, September 4, 1765, owed his commission in the Russian Army to the influence of the Prince de Ligne. He fought against the Turks in 1787вҒ вҖ“вҒ 88, and was distinguished for bravery and daring. At the Restoration in 1814 he re-entered the French Army, was made Governor of Lyons; shared the temporary exile of Louis XVIII. at Ghent in 1815, and, in the following year, as commandant of a division, took part in repressing the revolutionary disturbances in the central and southern departments of France. He died at Cirey, September 3, 1823.вҒ вҖ”<i>La Grande EncyclopГ©die</i>.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Charles Joseph, Prince de Ligne, was born at Brussels, May 12, 1735. In 1782 he visited St.В Petersburg as envoy of the Emperor Joseph II., won CatherineвҖҷs favour, and was appointed Field Marshal in the Russian Army. In 1788 he was sent to assist Potemkin at the siege of Ochakof. His <i>MГ©langes Militaires, etc.</i>, were first published in 1795. He died in November, 1814.</p>
					<p>Josef de Ribas (1737-c. 1797).] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLвҖҷAmiral de RibasвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ dГ©clara, en plein conseil, que ce nвҖҷГ©tait quвҖҷen donnant lвҖҷassaut quвҖҷon obtiendrait la place: cet avis parut hardi; on lui opposa mille raisons, auxquelles il rГ©pondit par de meilleures.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii, 205.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Prince (Gregor Alexandrovitch) Potemkin, born 1736, died October 15, 1791. вҖңHe alighted from his carriage in the midst of the highway, threw himself on the grass, and died under a treeвҖқ (<i>Life of Catherine II</i>., by W. Tooke, 1880, iii. 324). His character has been drawn by Louis Philippe, Comte de SГ©gur, who, writes Tooke (<i>ibid</i>., p. 326), вҖңlived a long time in habits of intimacy with him, and was so obliging as to delineate it at our solicitation.вҖқ вҖңIn his person were collected the most opposite defects and advantages of every kind. He was avaricious and ostentatious,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ haughty and obliging, politic and confiding, licentious and superstitious, bold and timid, ambitious and indiscreet; lavish of his bounties to his relations, his mistresses, and his favourites, yet frequently paying neither his household nor his creditors. His consequence always depended on a woman, and he was always unfaithful to her. Nothing could equal the activity of his mind, nor the indolence of his body. No dangers could appal his courage; no difficulties force him to abandon his projects. But the success of an enterprise always brought on disgust.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Everything with him was desultory; business, pleasure, temper, carriage. His presence was a restraint on every company. He was morose to all that stood in awe of him, and caressed all such as accosted him with familiarity.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ None had read less than he; few people were better informed.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ One while he formed the project of becoming Duke of Courland; at another he thought of bestowing on himself the crown of Poland. He frequently gave intimations of an intention to make himself a bishop, or even a simple monk. He built a superb palace, and wanted to sell it before it was finished. In his youth he had pleased her [Catherine] by the ardour of his passion, by his valour, and by his masculine beauty.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Become the rival of Orloff, he performed for his sovereign whatever the most romantic passion could inspire. He put out his eye, to free it from a blemish which diminished his beauty. Banished by his rival, he ran to meet death in battle, and returned with glory.вҖқ] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCe projet, remis Г  un autre jour, Г©prouva encore les plus grandes difficultГ©s; son courage les surmonta: il ne sвҖҷagГӯssait que de dГ©terminer le Prince Potiemkin; il y rГ©ussit. Tandis quвҖҷil se dГ©menait pour lвҖҷexГ©cution de projet agrГ©Г©, on construisait de nouvelles batteries; on comptait, le 12 dГ©cembre, quatre-vingts piГЁces de canon sur le bord du Danube, et cette journГ©e se passa en vives canonnades.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Histoire de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Into all aspirants for martial praise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe 13<sup>e</sup>, une partie des troupes Г©tait embarquГ©e; on allait lever le siГЁge: un courrier arrive.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Ce courrier annonce, de la part du prince, que le marГ©chal Souwarow va prendre le commandement des forces rГ©unies sous IsmaГ«l.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 205.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa lettre du Prince Potiemkin Г  Souwarow est trГЁs courte; elle peint le caractere de ces deux personnages. La voici dans toute sa teneur: <i>вҖҳVous prendrez IsmaГ«l Г  quel frix que ce soit!вҖҷ</i>вҖңвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң[Le courrier] est tГ©moin des cris de joie du Turc, qui se croyait Г  la fin de ses maux.вҖқ-<i>Ibid</i>., p. 205.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңBeat,вҖқ as in вҖңdead-beat,вҖқ is occasionally used for вҖңbeaten.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See <i>N.E.D.</i>, art. вҖңBeat,вҖқ 10.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe 16<sup>e</sup>, on voit venir de loin deux hommes courant Г  toute bride: on les prit pour des Kozaks; lвҖҷun Г©tait Souwarow, et lвҖҷautre son guide, portant un paquet gros comme le poing, et renfermant le bagage du gГ©nГ©ral.вҖқ-<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 205.</p>
					<p>M. de Castelnau in his description of the arrival of SuvГіroff on the field of battle (<i>Hist, de la</i> N.R., 1827, ii. pp, 205, 206) summarizes the Journal of the Duc de Richelieu. The original passage runs as follows:вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<p>вҖңLвҖҷarrivГ©e du comte Souvorow produisit un grand effet parmi les troupes.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ La maniГЁre dвҖҷГӘtre plus que simple, puis-quвҖҷil logeait sous une canonniГЁre, et quвҖҷil nвҖҷavait pas mГӘme de chaises dans sa tente, son affabilitГ©, sa bonhomie lui conciliaient lвҖҷaffection de tous les individus de son armГ©e. Cet homme singulier qui ressemble plus Г  un chef de cosaques ou de Tartares, quвҖҷau gГ©nГ©ral dвҖҷune armГ©e europГ©enne, est douГ© dвҖҷune intrГ©piditГ© et dвҖҷune hardiesse peu communes.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ La maniГЁre de vivre, de sвҖҷhabiller et de parler du comte Souvorow, est aussi singuliГЁre que ses opinions militaires.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Il mangeait dans sa tente assis par terre autour dвҖҷune natte sur laquelle il prenait le plus dГ©testable repas. LвҖҷaprГЁs-midi, un semblable repas lui servait de souper, il sвҖҷendormait ensuite pendant quelques heures, passait une partie de la nuit Г  chanter, et a la pointe du jour il sortait presque nu et se roulait sur lвҖҷherbe assurant que cet exercice lui Г©tait necessaire pour le prГ©server des rhumatismes.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Sa maniГЁre de sвҖҷexprimer dans toutes les langues est aussi singuliГЁre que toute sa faГ§on dвҖҷГӘtre, ses phrases sont incohГ©rentes, et sвҖҷil nвҖҷest pas insensГ©, il dit et fait du moins tout ce quвҖҷil faut pour le paraГ®tre; mais il est heureux et cette qualitГ© dont le Cardinal Mazarin faisait tant de cas, est, Г  bon droit, fort estimГ©e de lвҖҷImpГ©ratrice et du Prince PotemkinвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Le moment de lвҖҷarrivГ©e du Comte Souvorow fut annoncГ© par une dГ©charge gГ©nГ©rale des batteries ou camp et de la flotte.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Journal de mon Voyage en Allemagne</i>. <i>Soc, Imp. dвҖҷHist de Russie</i>, 1886, tom. liv. pp. 168, 169.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That sage John BullвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That fool John BullвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa premiГЁre attaque Г©tait composГ©e de trois colonnesвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Trois autres colonnes, destinГ©es a la seconde attaque, avaient pour chefs, etc.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ La troisiГЁme attaque par eau nвҖҷavait que deux colonnes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 207.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn construisit de nouvelles batteries le 18<sup>e</sup>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ On tint un conseil de guerre, on y examina les plans pour lвҖҷassaut proposГ©s par M. de Ribas, ils rГ©unirent tous les souffrages.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 208.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For once by some odd sort of magnanimity.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Bellona shook her spear with much sublimity.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fact: Suwaroff did this in person. <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ and neither swerve nor spill.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe 19<sup>e</sup> et le 20<sup>e</sup>, Souwarow exerГ§ailes soldats; il leur montra comment il fallait sвҖҷy prendre pour escalader; il enseigna aux recrues la maniГЁre de donner le coup de baГҜonnette.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid</i>., p. 208.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңPour ces exercices dвҖҷun nouveau genre, il se servit de fascines disposГ©es de maniГЁre a reprГ©senter un Turc.вҖқ-<i>Hist, de la Nauvelle Russie</i>, ii. 208.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>At which your wise men laughed, but all their Wit is</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lost, for his repartee was taking cities.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For some were thinking of their wives and families,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And others of themselves (as poet Samuel is).</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And others of themselves (as my friend Samuel is).</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For a detailed account of SuvГіroffвҖҷs personal characteristics, see <i>The Life of Field-Marshal Souvaroff</i>, by L.M.P. Tranchant de Laverne, 1814, pp. 267вҒ вҖ“вҒ 291; and <i>SuvГіroff</i>, by Lieut.-Colonel Spalding, 1890, pp. 222вҒ вҖ“вҒ 229.</p>
					<p>ByronвҖҷs epithet вҖңbuffoonвҖқ (line 5) may, perhaps, be traced to the following anecdote recorded by Tranchant de Laverne (p. 281): вҖңDuring the first war of PolandвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ he published, in the order of the day, that at the first crowing of the cock the troops would march to attack the enemy, and caused the spy to send word that the Russians would be upon them some time after midnight. But about eight oвҖҷclock Souvarof ran through the camp, imitating the crowing of a cock.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The enemy, completely surprised, lost a great number of men.вҖқ</p>
					<p>For his вҖңprayingвҖқ (line 6), <i>vide ibid.</i>, pp. 272, 273: вҖңHe made a short prayer after each meal, and again when going to bed. He usually performed his devotions before an image of St.В Nicholas, the patron saint of Russia.вҖқ</p>
					<p>вҖңHalf-dirtвҖқ (line 5) is, however, a calumny (<i>ibid</i>. p. 272): вҖңIt was his custom to rise at the earliest dawn; several buckets of cold water were thrown over his naked body.вҖқ</p>
					<p>The same writer (p. 268) repudiates the charges of excessive barbarity and cruelty brought against SuvГіroff by C.F.P. Masson, in his <i>MГ©moires Secrets sur la Russie</i> (<i>vide</i>, e.g., ed. 1800, i. 311): вҖңSouvorow ne scroit que le plus ridicule bouffon, sвҖҷil nвҖҷГ©toit pas montrГ© le plus barbare guerrier. CвҖҷest un monstre, qui renferme dans le corps dвҖҷun singe lвҖҷГўme dвҖҷun chien de boucher. Attila, son compatriote, et donвҖҷt il descend, peut-ГӘtre ne fut ni si heureux, ni si fГ©roce.вҖқ</p>
					<p>SuvГіroff did not regard himself as вҖңhalf-demon.вҖқ вҖңYour pencil,вҖқ he reminded the artist MГјller, вҖңwill delineate the features of my face. These are visible: but my inner man is hidden. I must tell you that I have shed rivers of blood. I tremble, but I love my neighbour. In my whole life I have made no one unhappy; not an insect hath perished by my hand. I was little; I was big. In fortuneвҖҷs ebb and flow, relying on God, I stood immovableвҒ вҖ”even as now.вҖқ (<i>SuvГіroff</i>, 1890, p. 228, note.)] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See, for instance, <i>The Storm</i>, in вҖңSouvarofвҖҷs Catechism,вҖқ Appendix (pp. 299вҒ вҖ“вҒ 305) to the <i>Life, etc.</i>, by Tranchant de Laverne, 1814: вҖңBreak down the fence.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Fly over the walls! Stab them on the ramparts!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Fire down the streets! Fire briskly!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Kill every enemy in the streets! Let the cavalry hack them!вҖқ etc.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The вҖңtuskвҖқ of the plough is the coulter or share. Compare вҖңDens vomerisвҖқ (Virg., <i>Georg.</i>, i. 22).] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of thine imaginary deathless bough</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The unebbing sea of blood and tears must flow.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Entailed upon HumanityвҖҷs estate.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As a brookвҖҷs stream to cope with OceanвҖҷs flood shed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But still we moderns equal you in bloodshed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As in a GeneralвҖҷs letter when well whacked</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Whatever deeds be done I will relate вҖҷem,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With some small variations in the text</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of killed and wounded who will not be missed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Whose leisure hours are wasted on an harlot.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The desperate death-cry and the BattleвҖҷs roar.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>End of Canto 7. 1822.вҒ вҖ”[MS.] <a href="canto-7.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 8-->
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa nuit Г©tait obscure; un brouillard Г©pais ne nous permettait de distinguer autre chose que le feu de notre artillerie, dont lвҖҷhorizon Г©tait embrasГ© de tous cГҙtГ©s: ce feu, partant du milieu du Danube, se rГ©flГ©chissait sur les eaux, et offrait un coup dвҖҷoeil trГЁs-singulier.вҖқ-<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 209.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңГҖ peine eut-on parcouru lвҖҷespace de quelques toises au-delГ  des batteries, que les Turcs, qui nвҖҷavaient point tirГ© pendant toute la nuit sвҖҷapperГ§evant de nos mouvemens, commencГЁrent de leur cГҙtГ© un feu trГЁs-vif, qui embrasa le reste de lвҖҷhorizon: mais ce fut bien autre chose lorsque, avancГ©s davantage, le feu de la mousqueterie commenГ§a dans toute lвҖҷГ©tendue du rempart que nous appercevions. Ce fut alors que la place parut Г  nos yeux comme un volcan dont le feu sortait de toutes parts.вҖқ-<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 209.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңUn cri universel dвҖҷ<i>allah</i>, qui se rГ©pГ©tait tout autour de la ville, vint encore rendre plus extraordinaire cet instant, dont il est impossible de se faire une idГ©e.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 209.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Allah Hu! is properly the war-cry of the Mussulmans, and they dwell on the last syllable, which gives it a wild and peculiar effect.</p>
					<p>[See <i>The Giaour</i>, line 734, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 120, note 1; see, too, <i>Siege of Corinth</i>, line 713, ibid., p. 481.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңToutes les colonnes Г©taient en mouvement; celles qui attaquaient par eau commandГ©es par le gГ©nГ©ral ArsГ©niew, essuyГЁrent un feu Г©pouvantable, et perdirent avant le jour un tiers de leurs officiers.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 209.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңBut <i>Thy</i>[*] most dreaded instrument,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In working out a pure intent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is ManвҒ вҖ”arrayed for mutual slaughterвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yea, <i>Carnage is thy daughter!</i>вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>WordsworthвҖҷs <i>Thanksgiving Ode</i> (January 18, 1816), stanza xii. lines 20, 23.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[*]To wit, the DeityвҖҷs: this is perhaps as pretty a pedigree for murder as ever was found out by Garter King at Arms.вҒ вҖ”What would have been said, had any free-spoken people discovered such a lineage?</p>
					<p>[Wordsworth omitted the lines in the last edition of his poems, which was revised by his own hand.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The Duc de RichelieuвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe Prince de Ligne fut blessГ© au genou; le Duc de Richelieu eut une balle entre le fond de son bonnet et sa tГӘte.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 210.</p>
					<p>For the gallantry of Prince Charles de Ligne (died September 14, 1792) eldest son of Prince Charles Joseph de Ligne (1735вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1814), see <i>The Prince de Ligne</i>, 1899, ii. 46.</p>
					<p>Armand Emanuel du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu, born 1767, a grandson of Louis FranГ§ois Duc de Richelieu, the Marshal of France (1696вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1780), served under Catherine II., and afterwards under the Czar Paul. On the restoration of Louis XVIII. he entered the KingвҖҷs household; and after the battle of Waterloo took office as President of the Council and Minister for Foreign Affairs. His <i>Journal de mon Voyage en Allemagne</i>, which was then unpublished, was placed at the disposal of the Marquis de Castelnau (see <i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, 1827, i. 241). It has been printed in full by the <i>SociГ©tГ© ImpГ©riale dвҖҷHistoire de Russie</i>, 1886, tom. liv. pp. 111вҒ вҖ“вҒ 198. See for further mention of the manuscript, <i>Le Duc de Richelieu</i>, par Raoul de Cisternes, 1898, Preface, p. 3, note 1. He died May 17, 1822, two months before Cantos VI., VII., VIII. were completed.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe brigadier Markow, insistant pour quвҖҷon emportГўt le prince blessГ©, reГ§ut un coup de fusil qui lui fracassa le pied.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 210.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTrois cents bouches Г  feu vomissaient sans interruption, et trente mille fusils alimentaient sans relГЎche une grГӘle de balles.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 210.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLes troupes, dГ©ja dГ©barquГ©es, se portГЁrent ГЎ droite pour sвҖҷemparer dвҖҷune batterie; et celles dГ©barquГ©es plus bas, principalement composГ©es des grenadiers de Fanagorie, escaladaient le retranchement et la palissade.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 210.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fact: see the Waterloo Gazettes. I recollect remarking at the time to a friend:вҒ вҖ”вҖқ<i>There</i> is <i>fame!</i> a man is killed, his name is Grose, and they print it Grove.вҖқ I was at college with the deceased, who was a very amiable and clever man, and his society in great request for his wit, gaiety, and вҖңChansons Г  boire.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[In the <i>London Gazette Extraordinary</i> of June 22, 1815, Captain Grove, 1st Guards, is among the list of killed. In the supplement to the <i>London Gazette</i>, published July 3, 1815, the mistake was corrected, and the entry runs, вҖң1st Guards, 3d Batt. Lieut.В Edward Grose, (Captain).вҖқ I am indebted to the courtesy of the Registrar of the University of Cambridge for the information that Edward Grose matriculated at St.В JohnвҖҷs College as a pensioner, December 7, 1805. Thanks to the вҖңmisprintвҖқ in the <i>Gazette</i>, and to Byron, he is вҖңa name for ever.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Vir nullГў non donatus lauru!</i>] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[At the Battle of Mollwitz, April 10, 1741, вҖңthe king vanishes for sixteen hours into the regions of Myth вҖҳinto Fairyland,вҖҷвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ of the kingвҖҷs flightвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the king himself, who alone could have told us fully, maintained always rigorous silence, and nowhere drops the least hint. So that the small fact has come down to us involved in a great bulk of fabulous cobwebs, mostly of an ill-natured character, set a-going by Voltaire, Valori, and others.вҖқвҒ вҖ”CarlyleвҖҷs <i>Frederick the Great</i>, 1862, iii. 314, 322, sq.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See General Valancey and Sir Lawrence Parsons.</p>
					<p>[Charles Vallancey (1721вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1812), general in the Royal Engineers, published an вҖңEssay on the Celtic Language,вҖқ etc., in 1782. вҖңThe language [the Iberno-Celtic],вҖқ he writes (p. 4), вҖңwe are now going to explain, had such an affinity with the Punic, that it may be said to have been, in a great degree, the language of Hanibal (<i>sic</i>), Hamilcar, and of Asdrubal.вҖқ Sir Laurence Parsons (1758вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1841), second Earl of Rosse, represented the University of Dublin 1782вҒ вҖ“вҒ 90, and afterwards KingвҖҷs County, in the Irish House of Commons. He was an opponent of the Union. In a pamphlet entitled <i>Defence of the Antient History of Ireland</i>, published in 1795, he maintains (p. 158) вҖңthat the Carthaginian and the Irish language being originally the same, either the Carthaginians must have been descended from the Irish, or the Irish from the Carthaginians.вҖқ] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Portuguese proverb says that вҖңhell is paved with good intentions.вҖқвҒ вҖ”[See <i>Vision of Judgment</i>, stanza xxxvii. line 8, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 499, note 2.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>At least the sharp faints of that вҖңburning marle.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe Nervii marched to the number of sixty thousand, and fell upon CГҰsar, as he was fortifying his camp, and had not the least notion of so sudden an attack. They first routed his cavalry, and then surrounded the twelfth and the seventh legions, and killed all the officers. Had not CГҰsar snatched a buckler from one of his own men, forced his way through the combatants before him, and rushed upon the barbarians; or had not the tenth legion, seeing his danger, ran from the heights where they were posted, and mowed down the enemyвҖҷs ranks, not one Roman would have survived the battle.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Plutarch, <i>CГҰsar</i>, LanghorneвҖҷs translation, 1838, p. 502.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңAs near a field of corn, a stubborn assвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>EвҖҷen so great Ajax son of Telamon.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Iliad</i>, Lord DerbyвҖҷs translation, bk. xi. lines 639, 645.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Nor care a single damn about his corps.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңNвҖҷapercevant plus le commandant du corps dont je faisais partie, et ignorant oГ№ je devais porter mes pas, je crus reconnaГ®tre le lieu oГ№ le rempart Г©tait situГ©; on y faisait un feu assez vif, que je jugeai ГӘtre celuiвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ du gГ©nГ©ral-major de Lascy.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 210. The speaker is the Duc de Richelieu. See, for original, his <i>Journal de mon Voyage, etc., Soc. Imp. dвҖҷHist. de Russie</i>, tom. liv. p. 179] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">For he was dizzy, busy, and his blood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lightening along his veins, and where he heard</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The liveliest fire, and saw the fiercest flood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Friar BaconвҖҷs mild discovery, shared</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">By Turks and Christians equally, he could</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No longer now resist the attraction of gunpowder</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But flew to where the merry orchestra played louder.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gunpowder is said to have been discovered by this friar. [N.B. Though Friar Bacon seems to have discovered gunpowder, he had the <i>humanity</i> not to record his discovery in intelligible language.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ whose short breath, and long faces</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Kept always pushing onwards to the Glacis.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>I Henry IV.</i>, act iii. sc. 1, line 53.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And that mechanic impulseвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii, sc. 1, lines 79, 80.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>Talus:</i> the slope or inclination of a wall, whereby, reclining at the top so as to fall within its base, the thickness is gradually lessened according to the height.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Milit. Dict.</i>] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAppelant ceux des chasseurs qui Г©taient autour de moi en assez grand nombre, je mвҖҷavanГ§ai et reconnus ne mвҖҷГӘtre point trompГ© dans mon calcul; cвҖҷГ©tait en effet cette colonne qui Г  lвҖҷinstant parvenait au sommet du rempart. Les Turcs de derriГЁre les travers et les flancs des bastions voisins fasaient sur elle un feu trГЁs-vif de canon et de mousqueterie. Je gravis, avec les gens qui mвҖҷavaient suivi, le talus intГ©rieur du rempart.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 210.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Baron Menno van Coehoorn (circ. 1641вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1704), a Dutch military engineer, the contemporary and rival of Vauban, invented a mortar which bore his name. He was the author of a celebrated work on fortification, published in 1692.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCe fut dans cet instant que je reconnus combien lвҖҷignorance du constructeur des palissades Г©tait importante pour nous; car, comme elles Г©taient placГ©es au milieu du parapet,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 211.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-675" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They were but two feet above the level.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</p>
					<p>[вҖңIl y avait de chaque cГҙtГ© neuf Г  dix pieds sur lesquels on pouvait marcher; et les soldats, aprГЁs ГӘtre montГ©s, avaient pu se ranger commodГ©ment sur lвҖҷespace extГ©rieur et enjamber ensuite les palissades, qui ne sвҖҷГ©levaient que dвҖҷГ -peu-prГЁs deux pieds au-dessus du niveau de la terre.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 211.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-676" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Friederich Wilhelm, Baron von BГјlow (1755вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1816), was in command of the 4th corps of the Prussian Army at Waterloo. August Wilhelm Antonius Neidhart von Gneisenau (1760вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1831) was chief of staff, and after BlГјcher was disabled by a fall at Ligny, assumed temporary command, June 16вҒ вҖ“вҒ 17, 1815. He headed the triumphant pursuit of the French on the night of the battle. For BlГјcherвҖҷs official account of the battles of Ligny and Waterloo (subscribed by Gneisenau), see W.H. MaxwellвҖҷs <i>Life of the Duke of Wellington</i>, 1841, iii. 566вҒ вҖ“вҒ 571; and for WellingtonвҖҷs acknowledgment of BlГјcherвҖҷs вҖңcordial and timely assistance,вҖқ see <i>Dispatches</i>, 1847, viii. 150. See, too, <i>The Life of Wellington</i>, by the Right Hon.В Sir Herbert Maxwell, Bart., 1899, ii. 88, <i>et passim</i>.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-677" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ as feminine of feature.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Led him onвҒ вҖ”although he was the gentlest creature,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As kind in heart as feminine of feature.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[PistolвҖҷs вҖң<i>Bezonian</i>вҖқ is a corruption of <i>bisognoso</i>вҒ вҖ”a rogue, needy fellow. Byron, quoting from memory, confuses two passages. In <i>2 Henry VI.</i>, act iv. sc. 1, line 134, Suffolk says, вҖңGreat men oft die of vile bezonians;вҖқ in <i>2 Henry IV.</i>, act v. sc. 3, line 112, Pistol says, вҖңUnder which King, Besonian? speak or die.вҖқ] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-679" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe GГ©nГ©ral Lascy, voyant arriver un corps, si Г -propos Г  son secours, sвҖҷavanГ§a vers lвҖҷofficier qui lвҖҷavait conduit, et, le prenant pour un Livonien, lui fit, en allemand, les complimens les plus flatteurs; le jeune militaire (le Duc de Richelieu) qui parlait parfaitement cette langue, y rГ©pondit avec sa modestie ordinaire.вҖқ-<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 211.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-680" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>The Task</i>, bk. i. line 749. It was pointed out to Cowper that the same thought had been expressed by Isaac Hawkins Browne, in <i>The Fire-side, a Pastoral Soliloquy</i>, lines 15, 16 (<i>Poems</i>, ed. 1768, p. 125)вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңI have said it at home, I have said it abroad,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That the town is ManвҖҷs world, but that this is of God.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>There is a parallel passage in M.T. Varro, <i>Rerum Rusticarum</i>, lib. iii. I. 4, вҖңNee minim, quod divina natura dedit agros, ars humami aedificavit urbes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See <i>The Task, etc.</i>, ed. by H.T. Griffith, 1896, ii. 234.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-681" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sulla spoke of himself as the вҖңfortunate,вҖқ and in the twenty-second book of his Commentaries, finished only two days before his death, вҖңhe tells us that the Chaldeans had predicted, that after a life of glory he would depart in the height of his prosperity.вҖқ He was fortunate, too, with regard to his funeral, for, at first, a brisk wind blew which fanned the pile into flame, and it was not till the fire had begun to die out that the rain, which had been expected throughout the day, began to fall in torrents.вҒ вҖ”LanghorneвҖҷs <i>Plutarch</i>, 1838, pp. 334, 335. See, too, <i>Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte</i>, stanza vii. <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, in. 308, note I.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-682" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Daniel Boone (1735вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1820) was the grandson of an English settler, George Boone, of Exeter. His great work in life was the conquest of Kentucky. Following in the steps of another pioneer, John Finley, he left his home in North Carolina in May, 1769, and, after numerous adventures, effected a settlement on the Kentucky river. He constructed a fort, which he named Boonesborough, and carried on a protracted campaign with varying but final success against the Indians. When Kentucky was admitted into the Union, February 4, 1791, he failed to make good his title to his property at Boonesborough, and withdrew to Mount Pleasant, beyond the Ohio. Thence, in 1795, he removed to Missouri, then a Spanish possession. Napoleon wrested Missouri from the Spaniards, only to sell the territory to the United States, with the result that in 1810 he was confirmed in the possession of 850 out of the 8000 acres which he had acquired in 1795. вҖңBoone was then seventy-five years of age, hale and strong. The charm of the hunterвҖҷs life clung to him to the last, and in his eighty-second year he went on a hunting excursion to the mouth of the Kansas river.вҖқвҒ вҖ”AppletonвҖҷs <i>Encyclopedia, etc</i>., art. вҖңBoone.вҖқ His fine and gracious nature reveals itself in his autobiography (<i>The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boon, Formerly a Hunter; Containing a Narrative of the Wars of Kentucky</i>; ImlayвҖҷs <i>North America</i>, 1793, ii. 52вҒ вҖ“вҒ 54). вҖңOne day,вҖқ he writes (pp. 330, <i>sq</i>.), вҖңI undertook a tour through the country, and the diversity and beauties of natureвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ expelled every gloomy and vexatious thought. Just at the close of day the gentle gales retired, and left the place to the disposal of a profound calm. Not a breeze shook the most tremulous leaf. I had gained the summit of a commanding ridge, and, looking round with astonishing delight, beheld the ample plains, the beauteous tracts below. On the other hand, I surveyed the famous river Ohio, that rolled in silent dignity, marking the western boundary of Kentucky with inconceivable grandeur.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ All things were still. I kindled a fire near a fountain of sweet water, and feasted on the loins of a buck, which a few hours before I had killed.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ No populous city, with all the varieties of commerce and stately structures, could afford so much pleasure to my mind as the beauties of nature I found here.вҖқ (See, too, <i>The Kentucky Pioneers</i>, by John Brown, <i>HarperвҖҷs New Monthly Magazine</i>, 1887, vol. lxxv. pp. 48вҒ вҖ“вҒ 71.)] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-683" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For John Kyrle, вҖңthe Man of RossвҖқ (1635вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1724), see PopeвҖҷs <i>Moral Essays</i>, epist. iii. lines 249вҒ вҖ“вҒ 284. See, too, <i>Letters of S.T. Coleridge</i>, 1895 (letter to R. Southey, July 13, 1794), i. 77.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-684" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron seems to have derived his knowledge of CatherineвҖҷs <i>vie intime</i> from the <i>MГ©moires Secrets sur la Russie</i>, of C.F.P. Masson, which were published in Amsterdam in 1800, and translated into English in the same year.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-685" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Michailo Smolenskoi Koutousof (1743вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1813), who was raised to eminence through the influence of Potemkin, was in command of the Austro-Russian Army at Austerlitz. During the retreat from Moscow he repulsed Napoleon at Malo-yaroslavetz, and pursued the French to Kalisz. Tolstoi introduces Koutousof in his novel, <i>War and Peace</i>, and dwells on his fatalism.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-686" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңParmi les colonnes, une de celles qui souffrirent le plus Г©tait commandГ©e par le gГ©nГ©ral Koutouzow (aujourdвҖҷhui Prince de Smolensko). Ce brave militaire rГ©unit lвҖҷintrГ©piditГ© Г  un grand nombre de connaissances acquises; il marche au feu avec la mГӘme gaГ®etГ© quвҖҷil va Г  une fГӘte; il sait commander avec autant de sang froid quвҖҷil dГ©ploie dвҖҷesprit et dвҖҷamabilitГ© dans le commerce habituel de la vie.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 212.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-687" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCe brave Koutouzow se jeta dans le fossГ©, fut suivi des siens, et ne pГ©nГ©tra jusquвҖҷau haut du parapet quвҖҷaprГЁs avoir Г©prouvГ© des difficultГ©s incroyables. (Le brigadier de Ribaupierre perdit la vie dans cette occasion: il avail fixГ© lвҖҷestime gГ©nГ©rale, et sa mort occasionna beaucoup de regrets.) Les Turcs accoururent en grand nombre; cette multitude repoussa deux fois le gГ©nГ©ral jusquвҖҷau fossГ©.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 212.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-688" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQuelques troupes russes, emportГ©es par le courant, nвҖҷayant pu dГ©barquer sur le terrain quвҖҷon leur avait prescrit,вҖқ etc.вҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-689" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңA вҖҳCavalierвҖҷ is an elevation of earth, situated ordinarily in the gorge of a bastion, bordered with a parapet, and cut into more or fewer embrasures, according to its capacity.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Milit. Dict.</i>] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-690" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ longГЁrent le rempart, aprГЁs la prise du cavalier, et ouvrirent la porte dite <i>de Kilia</i> aux soldats du gГ©nГ©ral Koutouzow.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-691" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIl Г©tait rГ©servГ© aux Kozaks de combler de leurs corps la partie du fossГ© oГ№ ils combattaient; leur colonne avail Г©tГ© divisГ©e entre MM.В Platow et dвҖҷOrlowвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-692" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ la premiГЁre partie, devant se joindre Г  la gauche du gГ©nГ©ral ArsГ©niew, fut foudroyГ©e par le feu des batteries, et parvint nГ©anmoins au haut du rempart.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-693" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLes Turcs la laissГЁrent un peu sвҖҷavancer, dans la ville, et firent deux sorties par les angles saillans des bastions.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-694" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Fatal to warriors as to womenвҒ вҖ”these.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-695" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңAlors, se trouvant prise en queue, elle fut Г©crasГ©e; cependant le Lieutenant-colonel YesouskoГҜ, qui commandait la rГ©serve composГ©e dвҖҷun bataillon du rГ©giment de Polozk, traversa le fossГ© sur les cadavres des KozaksвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvell Russia</i>, ii. 212.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-696" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ et extermina tous les Turcs quвҖҷil eut en tГӘte: ce brave homme fut tuГ© pendant lвҖҷaction.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 213.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-697" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLвҖҷautre partie des Kozaks, quвҖҷ Orlow commandait, souffrit de la maniГЁre la plus cruelle: elle attaqua Г  maintes reprises, fut souvent repoussГ©e, et perdit les deux tiers de son monde (cвҖҷest ici le lieu de placer une observation, que nous prenons dans les mГ©moires qui nous guident; elle fait remarquer combien il est raal vu de donner beaucoup de cartouches aux soldats qui doivent emporter un poste de vive force, et par consГ©quent oГ№ la baГҜonnette doit principalement agir; ils pensent ne devoir se servir de cette derniere arme, que lorsque les cartouches sont epuisГ©es: dans cette persuasion, ils retardent leur marche, et restent plus long-temps exposГ©s au canon et Г  la mitraille de lвҖҷennemi).вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 214.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-698" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa jonction de la colonne de MeknopвҒ вҖ”(le gГ©nГ©ral fut nial secondГ© et tuГ©)вҒ вҖ”ne put sвҖҷeffectuer avec celle qui lвҖҷavoisinait,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ces colonnes attaquГЁrent un bastion, et Г©prouvГЁrent une rГ©sistance opiniГўtre; raais bientГҙt des cris de victoire se font entendre de toutes parts, et le bastion est emportГ©: le sГ©raskier dГ©fendait cette partie.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 214.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-699" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ un officier de marine Anglais veut le faire prisonnier, et reГ§oit un coup de pistolet qui lвҖҷГ©tend roide mort.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 214.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-700" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLes Russes passent trois mille Turcs au fil de lвҖҷГ©pГ©e; seize baГҜonnettes percent Г  la fois le sГ©raskier.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 214.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-701" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLa ville est emportГ©e; lвҖҷimage de la mort et de la dГ©solation se reprГ©sente de tous les cГҙtГ©s le soldat furieux nвҖҷГ©coute plus la voix de ses officiers, il ne respire que le carnage; altГ©rГ© de sang, tout est indiffГ©rent pour lui.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 214.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-702" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As do the subtle snakeвҖҷs denounced of old.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-703" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which most of all doth man characterise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-704" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As Autumn winds disperse the yellow leaves.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-705" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>The Blues</i>, ecl. i. line 25, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 574, note 3.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-706" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңJe sauvai la vie Г  une fille de dix ans, donвҖҷt lвҖҷinnocence et la candeur formaient un contraste bien frappant avec la rage de tout ce qui mвҖҷenvironnait. En arrivant sur le bastion oГ№ commenГ§a le carnage, jвҖҷaperГ§us un groupe de quatre femmes Г©gorgГ©es, entre lesquelles cet enfant, dвҖҷune figure charmante, cherchait un asile contre la fureur de deux Kozaks qui Г©taient sur le point de la massacrer,вҖқвҒ вҖ”Duc de Richelieu. (See <i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 217.)] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-707" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWho never mentions Hell to ears polite.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Pope, <i>Moral Essays</i>, ep. iv, line 150.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-708" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCe spectacle mвҖҷattira bientГҙt, et je nвҖҷhГ©sitai pas, comme on peut le croire, Г  prendre entre mes bras cette infortunГ©e, que les barbares voulaient y poursuivre encore. JвҖҷeus bien de la peine Г  me retenir et Г  ne pas percer ces misГ©rables du sabre que je tenais suspendu sur leur tГӘte:вҒ вҖ”je me contentai cependant de les Г©loigner, non sans leur prodiguer les coups et les injures quвҖҷils mГ©ritaient.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқвҒ вҖ”Duc de Richelieu, <i>vide Hist, de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 217.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-709" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ JвҖҷeus le plaisir dвҖҷapercevoir que ma petite prisonniГЁre nвҖҷavait dвҖҷautre mal quвҖҷune coupure legere que lui avail faite au visage le mГӘme fer qui avail percГ© sa mГ©re.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Duc de Richelieu, <i>ibid</i>.</p>
					<p>The Turks clamoured for the child, and Richelieu was forced to give way. But in the original the story ends unhappily.</p>
					<p>вҖңJe fus obligГ© de cГ©der ГЎ leurs instances et ГЎ celles de lвҖҷofficier qui parlementait avec eux;вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ce ne fut pas sans de grandes difficultГ©s et sans une promesse expresse de la parl de cet officier [Colonel Ribas] de me la faire rendre aussitГҙt que les Tures auraient mis bas les armes. Je me sГ©parai donc de cet enfant qui mвҖҷГ©tait dГ©jГ  devenu trГЁs-cher, et mГӘme a prГ©sent, je ne puis penser ГЎ ce moment sans amertume, puisque malgrГ© toutes les recherches et les peines que je me donnai pour la retrouver, il me fut impossible dвҖҷy rГ©ussir, el je nвҖҷai que trop sujet de craindre quвҖҷelle nвҖҷait pГ©ri malheureusement.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>SociГ©tГ© ImpГ©riale dвҖҷHistoire de Russie</i>, tom. liv. p. 185.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-710" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sir Walter Scott (<i>Quarterly Review</i>, October, 1816, vol. xvi. p. 177) says that a вҖңbrother-poetвҖқ compared ByronвҖҷs features to the sculpture of a beautiful alabaster vase, only seen to perfection when lighted up from within. Byron alludes to this comparison in his <i>Detached Thoughts</i>, October 15, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 408. It may be noted that Lorenzo Bartolini, the Italian sculptor who took a bust of Byron at Pisa, in the spring of 1822, had been employed by Napoleon, in 1814, to design marble vases for a terrace at Elba, which were to be illuminated at night вҖңfrom within.вҖқ] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-711" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Russian military order. <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-712" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңLe sultan pГ©rit dans lвҖҷaction en brave homme, digne dвҖҷun meilleur destin; ce fut lui qui rallia les Turcs lorsque lвҖҷennemi pГ©nГ©tra dans la placeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ce sultan, dвҖҷune valeur Г©prouvГ©e, surpassait en gГ©nГ©rositГ© les plus civilisГ©s de sa nation; cinq de ses fils combattaient Г  ses cГҙtГ©s, il les encourageait par son exemple.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 215.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-713" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWhen Charles XII. reached Bender, August 1, 1709, he refused, in the first instance, to cross the river Dniester, and on yielding to the representations of the Turks, he declined to enter the town, but decided on remaining encamped on an island, in spite of the assurances of the inhabitants that it was occasionally flooded.вҖқ But, perhaps, Byron had in mind VoltaireвҖҷs remarks on CharlesвҖҷs <i>OpiniГўtretГ©</i>. (See <i>Histoire de Charles XII.</i>, 1772, p. 377. See, too, <i>Charles XII.</i>, by Oscar Browning, 1899, pp. 231вҒ вҖ“вҒ 234.)] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-714" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ like celestial patience.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-715" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Because a hunchbackвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-716" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In battle to old age and ugliness.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-717" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In one immortal glance, and then he died.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-718" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTous cinq furent tous tuГ©s sous ces yeux: il ne cessa point de se battre, rГ©pondit par des coups de sabre aux propositions de se rendre, et ne fut atteint du coup mortel quвҖҷaprГЁs avoir abattu de sa main beaucoup de Kozaks des plus acharnГ©e Г  sa prise; le reste de sa troupe fut massacrГ©.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 215.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-719" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQuoique les Russes fussent rГ©pandus dans la ville, le bastion de pierre rГ©sistait encore; il Г©tait dГ©fendu par un vicillard, pacha Г  trois queues, et commandant les forces rГ©unies Г  IsmaГ«l. On lui proposa une capitulation; il demanda si le reste de la ville Г©tait conquis; sur cette rГ©ponse, il autorisa quelques-uns de ces officiers Г  capituler avec M. de Ribas.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 215.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-720" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңPendant ce colloque, il resta Г©tendu sur des tapis placГ©s sur les ruines de la forteresse, fumant sa pipe avec la mГӘme tranquillitГ© et la mГӘme indiffГ©rence que sвҖҷil eГ»t Г©tГ© Г©tranger Г  tout ce qui se passait.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, p. 215.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-721" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of burning cities, those full moons of slaughter</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was imaged back in blood instead of water.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. Alternative reading.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-722" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Would <i>you</i> do less, вҖң<i>pro focis et pro aris</i>вҖң?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-723" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңSpreadвҒ вҖ”spread for Vitellius, the royal repast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Till the gluttonous despot be stuffed to the gorge!вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Irish Avatar</i>, stanza 20, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1891, iv. 559.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-724" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңOn Г©gorgea indistinctement, on saccagea la place; et la rage du vainqueurвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ se rГ©pandit comme un torrent furieux qui a renversГ© les digues qui le rГ©tenaient: personne obtint de grГўce, et <i>trente huit mille huit cent soixante</i> Turcs pГ©rirent dans cette journГ©e de sang.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Hist. de la Nouvelle Russie</i>, ii. 216.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-725" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ of my peroration.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-726" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ the cause I cannot guessвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I hardly think it was commiseration.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-727" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the original RussianвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңSlava bogu! slava vam!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>KrГ©post vzata i ya tam;вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>a kind of couplet; for he was a poet.</p>
					<p>[J.H. CastГ©ra (<i>Vie de Catherine II.</i>, 1797, ii. 374) relates this incident in connection with the fall of Turtukey (or Tutrakaw) in Bulgaria, giving the words in French, вҖңGloire Г  Dieu! Louange Г  Catherine! Toutoukai est pris. Souwaroff y est entrГ©.вҖқ W. Tooke (<i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, 1800, iii. 278). CastГ©raвҖҷs translator, gives the original Russian with an English version. But according to Spalding (<i>SuvГіroff</i>, 1890, pp. 42, 43), the words, which were written on a scrap of paper, and addressed to Soltikoff, ran thus: вҖңYour Excellency, we have conquered. Glory to God! Glory to you! Alexander SuvГіroff.вҖқ When Ismail was taken he wrote to Potemkin, вҖңThe Russian standard floats above the walls of Ismail,вҖқ and to the Empress, вҖңProud Ismail lies at your MajestyвҖҷs feet.вҖқ The tenour of the poetical message on the fall of Tutrakaw recalls the triumphant piety of the Emperor William I. of Germany. See, too, for вҖңmad SuwarrowвҖҷs rhymes,вҖқ Canto IX. stanza lx. lines 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 4.] <a href="canto-8.xhtml#noteref-728" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 9-->
				<li id="note-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanzas i.-viii., which are headed вҖң<i>Don Juan</i>, Canto III., July 10, 1819,вҖқ are in the handwriting of (?) the Countess Guiccioli. Stanzas ix., x., which were written on the same sheet of paper, are in ByronвҖҷs handwriting. The original MS. opens with stanza xi., вҖңDeath laughs,вҖқ etc. (See letter to Moore, July 12, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 96.)] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-729" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңFaut quвҖҷ lord Villain-ton ait tout pris;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>NвҖҷy a plus dвҖҷ argent dans cвҖҷ gueux de Paris.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>De BГ©ranger, вҖңComplainte dвҖҷune de ces Demoiselles a lвҖҷOccasion des Affaires du Temps (FГ©vrier, 1816),вҖқ <i>Chansons</i>, 1821, ii. 17.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Compare a retaliatory epigram which appeared in a contemporary newspaperвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңThese French <i>petit-maГ®tres</i> who the spectacle throng,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Say of WellingtonвҖҷs dress <i>quвҖҷil fait vilain ton!</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, at Waterloo, Wellington made the French stare</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When their army he dressed <i>Г  la mode Angleterre!</i>вҖң]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-730" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Oh Wellington (or вҖңVilaintonвҖқ)вҒ вёә.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. B.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-731" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Query, <i>Ney?</i>вҒ вҖ”PrinterвҖҷs Devil. [Michel Ney, Duke of Elchingen, вҖңthe bravest of the braveвҖқ (see <i>Ode from the French</i>, stanza i. <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 431), born January 10, 1769, was arrested August 5, and shot December 7, 1815.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-732" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The story of the attempted assassination (February 11, 1818) of the Duke of Wellington, which is dismissed by Alison in a few words (<i>Hist. of Europe</i> (1815вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1852), 1853, i. 577, 578), occupies many pages of the <i>Supplementary Despatches</i> (1865, xii. 271вҒ вҖ“вҒ 546). Byron probably drew his own conclusions as to the Kinnaird-Marinet incident, from the <i>Letter to the Duke of Wellington on the Arrest of M. Marinet</i>, by Lord Kinnaird, 1818. The story, which is full of interest, may be briefly recounted. On January 30, 1818, Lord Kinnaird informed Sir George Murray (Chief of the Staff of the Army of Occupation) that a person, whose name he withheld, had revealed to him the existence of a plot to assassinate the Duke of Wellington. At 12.30В a.m., February 11, 1818, the Duke, on returning to his Hotel, was fired at by an unknown person; and then, but not till then, he wrote to urge Lord Clancarty to advise the Prince Regent to take steps to persuade or force Kinnaird to disclose the name of his informant. A Mr.В G.W. Chad, of the Consular Service, was empowered to proceed to Brussels, and to seek an interview with Kinnaird. He carried with him, among other documents, a letter from the Duke to Lord Clancarty, dated February 12, 1818. A postscript contained this intimation: вҖңIt may be proper to mention to you that the French Government are disposed to go every length in the way of negotiation with the person mentioned by Lord Kinnaird, or others, to discover the plot.вҖқ</p>
					<p>Kinnaird absolutely declined to give up the name of his informant, but, acting on the strength of the postscript, which had been read but not shown to him, started for Paris with вҖңthe great unknown.вҖқ Some days after their arrival, and while Kinnaird was a guest of the Duke, the man was arrested, and discovered to be one Nicholle or Marinet, who had been appointed <i>receveur</i> under the restored government of Louis XVIII., but during the <i>Cent jours</i> had fled to Belgium, retaining the funds he had amassed during his term of office. Kinnaird regarded this action of the French Government as a breach of faith, and in a вҖңMemorialвҖқ to the French Chamber of Peers, and his <i>Letter</i>, maintained that the DukeвҖҷs postscript implied a promise of a safe conduct for Marinet to and from Paris to Brussels. The Duke, on the other hand, was equally positive (see his letter to Lord Liverpool, May 30, 1818) вҖңthat he never intended to have any negotiations with anybody.вҖқ Kinnaird was a вҖңdog with a bad name.вҖқ He had been accused (see his <i>Letter to the Earl of Liverpool</i>, 1816, p. 16) of вҖңthe promulgation of dangerous opinions,вҖқ and of intimacy вҖңwith persons suspected.вҖқ The Duke speaks of him as вҖңthe friend of RevolutionistsвҖқ! It is evident that he held the dangerous doctrine that a promise to a rogue <i>is</i> a promise, and that the authorities took a different view of the ethics of the situation. It is clear, too, that the DukeвҖҷs postscript was ambiguous, but that it did not warrant the assumption that if Marinet went to Paris he should be protected. The air was full of plots. The great Duke despised and was inclined to ignore the pistol or the dagger of the assassin; but he believed that вҖңmischief was afoot,вҖқ and that вҖңgreat personagesвҖқ might or might not be responsible. He was beset by difficulties at every turn, and would have been more than mortal if he had put too favourable a construction on the scruples, or condoned the imprudence of a вҖңfriend of Revolutionists.вҖқ] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-733" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reference may be to the Duke of WellingtonвҖҷs intimacy with Lady Frances Wedderburn Webster. Byron had вҖңpassed that wayвҖқ himself (see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 251, note i, 323, etc.), and could hardly attack the Duke on <i>that</i> score.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-734" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThou art the best oвҖҷ the cut-throats.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 17.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-735" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңI have supped full of horrors.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 5, line 13.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-736" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Vide</i> speeches in Parliament, after the battle of Waterloo. <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-737" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI at this time got a post, being for fatigue, with four others. We were sent to break biscuit, and make a mess for Lord WellingtonвҖҷs hounds. I was very hungry, and thought it a good job at the time, as we got our own fill, while we broke the biscuitвҒ вҖ”a thing I had not got for some days. When thus engaged, the Prodigal Son was never once out of my mind; and I sighed, as I fed the dogs, over my humble situation and my ruined hopes.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Journal of a Soldier of the 71st Regiment</i>, 1806 to 1815 (Edinburgh, 1822), pp. 132, 133.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-738" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe are assured that Epaminondas died so poor that the Thebans buried him at the public charge; for at his death nothing was found in his house but an iron spit.вҖқвҒ вҖ”PlutarchвҖҷs <i>Fabius Maximus</i>, LanghorneвҖҷs translation, 1838, p. 140. See, too, Cornelius Nepos, <i>Epam</i>., cap. iii. вҖңPaupertatem adeo facilГЁ perpessus est, ut de Republica nihil prГҰter gloriam ceperit.вҖқ] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-739" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For PittвҖҷs refusal to accept ВЈ100,000 from the merchants of London towards the payment of his debts, or ВЈ30,000 from the KingвҖҷs Privy Purse, see <i>Pitt</i>, by Lord Rosebery, 1891. p. 231.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-740" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To <i>you</i> this <i>one</i> unflattering Muse inscribes.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-741" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He strips from man his mantle (which is dear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though beautiful in youth) his carnal skin.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-742" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. i, line 56.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-743" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңO dura messorum ilia!вҖқ etc.-Hor., <i>Epod.</i> iii. 4.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-744" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Ye iron gutsвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-745" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCe nвҖҷest quвҖҷГ  lвҖҷГ©dition de 1635 quвҖҷon voit paraГ®tre la devise que Montaigne avait adoptГ©e, le <i>que sais-je</i>? avec lвҖҷemblГЁme des balances.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Ce <i>que sais-je</i> que Pascal a si sГ©vГЁrement analysГ© se lit au chapitre douze du livre ii; il caractГ©rise parfaitement la philosophie de Montaigne; il est la consГ©quence de cette maxime quвҖҷil avait inscrite en grec sur les solives de sa librairie: вҖҳIl nвҖҷest point de raisonnement au quel on nвҖҷoppose un raissonnement contraire.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Oeuvres deвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Montaigne</i>, 1837, вҖңNotice Bibliographique,вҖқ p. xvii.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-746" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Concerning the Pyrrhonists or Sceptics and their master Pyrrho, who held that Truth was incomprehensible (<i>inprensibilis</i>), and that you may not affirm of aught that it be rather this or that, or neither this nor that (<span title="ou) ma~llon ou(/tГҙs e)/chei to/de">ОҝбҪҗ Ојбҫ¶О»О»ОҝОҪ ОҝбҪ•П„ПүПӮ бј”ПҮОөО№ П„ПҢОҙОө</span> <span title="ГӘ)\ e)kei/nГҙs ГӘ)\ ou)dete/rГҙs">бјў бјҗОәОөОҜОҪПүПӮ бјў ОҝбҪҗОҙОөП„ОӯПҒПүПӮ</span>), see Aul. Gellii <i>Noct. Attic.</i>, lib. xi. cap. v.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-747" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>Othello</i>, [act ii. sc. 3, lines 206, 207: вҖңWell, GodвҖҷs above all, and there be souls must be saved; and there be souls must not be savedвҒ вҖ”LetвҖҷs have no more of this.вҖқ] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-748" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act v. sc. 2, lines 94, 98, 102.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-749" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңLycanthropy,вҖқ see вҖңThe SoldierвҖҷs StoryвҖқ in the <i>SatyricГҙn</i> of Petronius Arbiter, cap. 62; see, too, <i>Letters on Demonology, etc.</i>, by Sir W. Scott, 1830, pp. 211, 212.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-750" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In respect of suavity and forbearance Melancthon was the counterpart of Luther. John Arrowsmith (1602вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1657), in his <i>Tractica Sacra</i>, describes him as вҖңVir in quo cum pietate doctrina, et cum utrГўque candor certavit.вҖқ] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-751" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like Moses or like Cobbett who have neвҖҷer.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Moses and Cobbet proclaim themselves the вҖңmeekest of men.вҖқ See their writings.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like Moses who was вҖңvery meekвҖқ had neвҖҷer.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-752" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See his вҖңCorrespondance avec LвҖҷImpГ©ratrice de Russie,вҖқ <i>Oeuvres ComplГЁtes</i> de Voltaire, 1836, x. 393вҒ вҖ“вҒ 477. M. Waliszewski, in his <i>Story of a Throne</i>, 1895, i. 224, has gathered a handful of these flowers of speech: вҖңShe is the chief person in the world.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is the fire and life of nations.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is a saint.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is above all saints.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is equal to the mother of God.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ She is the divinity of the North.вҒ вҖ”<i>Te Catherinam laudamus, te Dominam confitemur, etc., etc.</i>вҖң] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-753" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of everything that ever cursed a nation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-754" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңIt is still more difficult to say which form of government is the <i>worst</i>вҒ вҖ”all are so bad. As for democracy, it is the worst of the whole; for what is (<i>in fact</i>) democracy?вҒ вҖ”an Aristocracy of Blackguards.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See вҖңMy DictionaryвҖқ (May 1, 1821), <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 405, 406.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-755" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Though priests and slaves may join the servile cry.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-756" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Greece I never saw or heard these animals; but among the ruins of Ephesus I have heard them by hundreds.</p>
					<p>[See <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza cliii. line 6, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 441; and <i>Siege of Corinth</i>, line 329, ibid., 1900, iii. 462, note 1.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-757" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Whereas the others hunt for rascal spiders.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-758" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which still are strongly fluttering to be free.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-759" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 576, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 570.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-760" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Nadir Shah, or Thamas Kouli Khan, born November, 1688, invaded India, 1739вҒ вҖ“вҒ 40, was assassinated June 19, 1747.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-761" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ went mad and was</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Killed because what he swallowed would not pass.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-762" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He was killed in a conspiracy, after his temper had been exasperated by his extreme costivity to a degree of insanity.</p>
					<p>[To such a height had his madness (attributed to <i>melancholia</i> produced by dropsy) attained, that he actually ordered the Afghan chiefs to rise suddenly upon the Persian guard, and seize theвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ chief nobles; but the project being discovered, the intended victims conspired in turn, and a body of them, including NadirвҖҷs guard, and the chief of his own tribe of Afshar, entered his tent at midnight, and, after a momentвҖҷs involuntary pauseвҒ вҖ”when challenged by the deep voice at which they had so often trembledвҒ вҖ”rushed upon the king, who being brought to the ground by a sabre-stroke, begged for life, and attempted to rise, but soon expired beneath the repeated blows of the conspirators.вҒ вҖ”<i>The Indian Empire</i>, by R. Montgomery Martin (1857), i. 172.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-763" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. stanza lxvii. line 5, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 64, note 3.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-764" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Or the substrataвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-765" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare Preface to <i>Cain</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, V. 210, note 1.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-766" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide ante,</i> <a>Canto VIII. stanza cxxvi</a>. line 9, p. 368.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-767" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act i. sc. 5, line 189.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-768" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I never know whatвҖҷs next to comeвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-769" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[It is possible that the phrase вҖңpainted snowsвҖқ was suggested by TookeвҖҷs description of the winter-garden of the Taurida Palace: вҖңThe genial warmth,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the voluptuous silence that reigns in this enchanting garden, lull the fancy into sweet romantic dreams: we think ourselves in the groves of Italy, while torpid nature, through the windows of this pavilion, announces the severity of a northern winterвҖқ (<i>The Life, etc.</i>, 1800, iii. 48).] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-770" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>OвҖҷer limits which mightilyвҒ вҖ”:</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-771" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ in Youth and GloryвҖҷs pillory.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-772" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his <i>Notes sur le Don Juanisme</i> (<i>Mercure de France</i>, 1898, xxvi. 66), M. Bruchard says that this phrase defines and summarizes the Byronic Don Juan.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-773" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i2">The Empress smiled while all the Orloff frownedвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A numerous family, to whose heart or hand</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Mild Catherine owed the chance of being crowned,.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-774" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[C.F.P. Masson, in his <i>MГ©moires Secrets, etc.</i>, 1880, i. 150вҒ вҖ“вҒ 178, gives a list of twelve favourites, and in this Canto, Don Juan takes upon himself the characteristics of at least three, LanskoГҜ, Zoritch (or Zovitch), and Plato Zoubof. For example (p. 167), вҖңZoritchвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ est le seul Г©tranger quвҖҷelle ait osГ© crГ©er son favori pendant son regne. CвҖҷГ©toit un <i>Servien</i> Г©chappГ© du bagne de Constantinople oГ№ il Г©toit prisonnier: il parut, pour la premiГЁre fois, en habit de hussard Г  la cour. Il Г©blouit tout le monde par sa beautГ©, et les vielles dames en parlent encore comme dвҖҷun Adonis.вҖқ M. Waliszewski, in his <i>Romance of an Empress</i> (1894), devotes a chapter to вҖңPrivate Life and FavouritismвҖқ (ii. 234вҒ вҖ“вҒ 286), in which he graphically describes the election and inauguration of the <i>Vremienchtchik</i>, вҖңthe man of the moment,вҖқ paramour regnant, and consort of the Empress <i>pro hac vice</i>: вҖңвҖҠвҖҳWe may observe in Russia a sort of interregnum in affairs, caused by the displacement of one favourite and the installation of his successor.вҖҷвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The interregnums are, however, of very short duration. Only one lasts for several months, between the death of LanskoГҜ (1784) and the succession of Iermolof.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ There is no lack of candidates. The place is good.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Sometimes, too, on the height by the throne, reached at a bound, these spoilt children of fate grow giddy.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It is over in an instant, at an evening reception it is noticed that the Empress has gazed attentively at some obscure lieutenant, presented but just beforeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ next day it is reported that he has been appointed aide-de-camp to her Majesty. What that means is well known. Next day he finds himself in the special suite of rooms.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The rooms are already vacated, and everything is prepared for the new-comer. All imaginable comfort and luxuryвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ await him; and, on opening a drawer, he finds a hundred thousand roubles [about ВЈ20,000], the usual first gift, a foretaste of Pactolus. That evening, before the assembled court, the Empress appears, leaning familiarly on his arm, and on the stroke of ten, as she retires, the new favourite follows herвҖқ (<i>ibid.</i>, pp. 246вҒ вҖ“вҒ 249).] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-775" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[After the death or murder of her husband, Peter III., Catherine Alexievna (1729вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1796) (born Sophia Augusta), daughter of the Prince of Anhalt Zerbst, was solemnly crowned (September, 1762) Empress of all the Russias.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-776" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And almost died for the scarce-fledged Lanskoi.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-777" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He was the grande passion of the grande Catherine. See her Lives under the head of вҖңLanskoi.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[Lanskoi was a youth of as fine and interesting a figure as the imagination can paint. Of all CatherineвҖҷs favourites, he was the man whom she loved the most. In 1784 he was attacked with a fever, and perished in the arms of her Majesty. When he was no more, Catherine gave herself up to the most poignant grief, and remained three months without going out of her palace of Tzarsko-selo. She afterwards raised a superb monument to his memory. (See <i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, 1800, iii. 88, 89.)] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-778" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Ten months after the death of Lanskoi, the Empress consoled herself with Iermolof, described, by Bezborodky, as вҖңa modest refined young man, who cultivates the society of serious people.вҖқ In less than a year this excellent youth is, in turn, displaced by Dmitrief Mamonof. His <i>petit nom</i> was <i>Red Coat</i>, and, for a time, he is a вҖңpriceless creature.вҖқ вҖңHe has,вҖқ says Catherine, вҖңtwo superb black eyes, with eyebrows outlined as one rarely sees; about the middle height, noble in manner, easy in demeanour.вҖқ But Mamonof suffered from вҖңscruples of conscience,вҖқ and, after a while, with CatherineвҖҷs consent and blessing, was happily married to the Princess Shtcherbatof, a maid of honour, and not, as Byron supposed, a rival вҖңman of the moment.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See <i>The Story of a Throne</i>, by K. Waliszewski, 1895, ii. 135, sq.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-779" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was written long before the suicide of that person. [For вҖңhis parts of speechвҖқ compareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ that long mandarin</span>
							<br/>
							<span>C-stle-r-agh (whom Fum calls the Confucius of Prose)</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was rehearsing a speech upon EuropeвҖҷs repose</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To the deep double bass of the fat IdolвҖҷs nose.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>MooreвҖҷs <i>Fum and Hum, The Two Birds of Royalty</i>.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-780" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Beppo</i>, stanza xvii. line 8, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 165. See, too, letter to Hoppner, December 31, 1819, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 393.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-781" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Beneath his chiselвҒ вҖ”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Beneath his touchesвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-782" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ and bound fair Helen in a bond.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-783" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hor., <i>Sat.</i>, lib. i. sat. iii. lines 107, 108. <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-784" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That Riddle which all read, none understand.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-785" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ thou Sea which lavest LifeвҖҷs sand.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-786" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңFortune and victory sit on thy helm.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Richard III.</i>, act v, sc. 3, line 79.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-787" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңCatherine had been handsome in her youth, and she preserved a gracefulness and majesty to the last period of her life. She was of a moderate stature, but well proportioned; and as she carried her head very high, she appeared rather tall. She had an open front, an aquiline nose, an agreeable mouth, and her chin, though long, was not mis-shapen. Her hair was auburn, her eyebrows black and rather thick, and her blue eyes had a gentleness which was often affected, but oftener still a mixture of pride. Her physiognomy was not deficient in expression; but this expression never discovered what was passing in the soul of Catherine, or rather it served her the better to disguise it.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, iii. 381 (translated from <i>Vie de Catherine II.</i> (J.H. CastГ©ra), 1797, ii. 450).] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-788" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHis fortune swells him: вҖҷTis rank, heвҖҷs married.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Sir Giles Overreach</i>, in MassingerвҖҷs <i>New Way to pay Old Debts</i>, act v. sc. 1.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-789" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. iv. lines 58, 59.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-790" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңNot CГҰsarвҖҷs empress would I deign to prove;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">No! make me mistress to the man I love.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Pope, <i>Eloisa to Abelard</i>, lines 87, 88.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-791" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>OвҖҷer whom an Empress her Crown-jewels scattering</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was wed with something better than a ring.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-792" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңSeveral persons who lived at the court affirm that Catherine had very blue eyes, and not brown, as M. RulhiГЁres has stated.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Life of Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, 1800, iii. 382.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-793" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The historic Catherine (<i>ГҰt.</i> 62) was past her meridian in the spring of 1791.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-794" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Her figure, and her vigour, and her rigour.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-795" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In its sincere beginning, or dull end.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-796" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For such all women are just <i>then</i>, no doubt.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-797" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of such sensations, in the drowsy drear</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>After</i>вҒ вҖ”which shadows the, sayвҒ вҖ”<i>second</i> year.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of that sad heavy, drowsy, doubly drear</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>After</i>, which shadows the firstвҒ вҖ”say, year.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-798" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanza lxxvi. is not in the MS.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-799" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Russian estate is always valued by the number of the slaves upon it. <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-800" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The вҖңProtassovaвҖқ (born 1744) was a cousin of the Orlofs. She survived Catherine by many years, and was, writes M. Waliszewski (<i>The Story of a Throne</i>, 1895, ii. 193), вҖңpresent at the Congress of Vienna, covered with diamonds like a reliquary, and claiming precedence of every one.вҖқ She is named <i>lвҖҷГ©prouveuse</i> in a note to the <i>MГ©moires Secrets</i>, 1800, i. 148.] <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-801" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And not be dazzled by its early glare.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-802" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>End of Canto 9<sup>th</sup>, Augt. Sept., 1822. B. <a href="canto-9.xhtml#noteref-803" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 10-->
				<li id="note-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>In a most natural whirling of rotation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-804" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Since AdamвҒ вҖ”gloriously against an apple.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-805" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңNeither Pemberton nor Whiston, who received from Newton himself the history of his first Ideas of Gravity, records the story of the falling apple. It was mentioned, however, to Voltaire by Catherine Barton (afterwards Mrs.В Conduit), NewtonвҖҷs niece. We saw the apple tree in 1814.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The tree was so much decayed that it was taken down in 1820вҖқ (<i>Memoirs, etc., of Sir Isaac Newton</i>, by Sir David Brewster, 1855, i. 27, note 1). Voltaire tells the story thus (<i>ГүlГ©ments de la Philosophie de Newton</i>, Partie III. chap, iii.): вҖңUn jour, en lвҖҷannГ©e 1666 [1665], Newton, retirГ© Г  la campagne, et voyant tomber des fruits dвҖҷun arbre, Г  ce que mвҖҷa contГ© sa niГЁce (Madame Conduit), se laissa aller Г  une mГ©ditation profonde sur la cause qui entraГ®ne ainsi tous les corps dans une ligne qui, si elle Г©tait prolongГ©e, passerait Г  peu prГЁs par le centre de la terre.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Oeuvres ComplГЁtes</i>, 1837, v. 727.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-806" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To the then unploughed starsвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-807" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>ChurchillвҖҷs Grave,</i> line 23, <i>Poetical Works,</i> 1901, iv. 47, note 1.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-808" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Shelley entitles him вҖңThe Pilgrim of Eternity,вҖқ in his <i>Adonais</i> (stanza xxx. line 3), which was written and published at Pisa in 1821.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-809" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron left Pisa (Palazzo Lanfranchi on the Arno) for the Villa Saluzzo at Genoa, in the autumn of 1822.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-810" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Malicious peopleвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-811" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe think the abuse of Mr.В SoutheyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ by far too savage and intemperate. It is of ill example, we think, in the literary world, and does no honour either to the <i>taste</i> or the <i>temper</i> of the noble author.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, February, 1822, vol. xxxvi. p. 445.</p>
					<p>вҖңI have read the recent article of JeffreyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I suppose the long and the short of it is, that he wishes to provoke me to reply. But I wonвҖҷt, for I owe him a good turn still for his kindness by-gone. Indeed, I presume that the present opportunity of attacking me again was irresistible; and I canвҖҷt blame him, knowing what human nature is.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Moore, June 8, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 80.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-812" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”that essence of all Lie.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-813" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңReformers,вҖқ or rather вҖңReformed.вҖқ The Baron Bradwardine in <i>Waverley</i> is authority for the word. [The word is certainly in ButlerвҖҷs <i>Hudibras</i>, Part II. Canto 2вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңAlthough your Church be opposite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To mine as Black Fryars are to White,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In <i>Rule</i> and <i>Order</i>, yet I grant</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You are a <i>Reformado Saint</i>.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-814" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanza XV. is not in the MS. The вҖңlegal broom,вҖқ <i>sc.</i> Brougham, was an afterthought.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-815" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Query, <i>suit</i>?вҒ вҖ”PrinterвҖҷs Devil. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-816" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[It has been argued that when вҖңgreat CГҰsar fellвҖқ he wore his вҖңrobeвҖқ to muffle up his face, and that, in like manner, Jeffrey sank the critic in the lawyer. A вҖңdeal likelierвҖқ interpretation is that Jeffrey wore вҖңhis gownвҖқ right royally, as CГҰsar wore his вҖңtriumphal robe.вҖқ (See PlutarchвҖҷs <i>Julius CГҰsar</i>, LanghorneвҖҷs translation, 1838, p. 515.)] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-817" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI donвҖҷt like to bore you about the Scotch novels (as they call them, though two of them are English, and the rest half so); but nothing can or could ever persuade me, since I was the first ten minutes in your company, that you are <i>not</i> the man. To me these novels have so much of вҖҳAuld Lang SyneвҖҷ (I was bred a canny Scot till ten years old), that I never move without them.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Sir W. Scott, January 12, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 4, 5.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-818" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Island</i>, Canto II. lines 280вҒ вҖ“вҒ 297.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-819" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The brig of Don, near the вҖңauld tounвҖқ of Aberdeen, with its one arch, and its black deep salmon stream below, is in my memory as yesterday. I still remember, though perhaps I may misquote, the awful proverb which made me pause to cross it, and yet lean over it with a childish delight, being an only son, at least by the motherвҖҷs side. The saying as recollected by me was this, but I have never heard or seen it since I was nine years of age:вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңBrig of Balgounie, <i>black</i>вҖҷs your <i>waвҖҷ,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>WiвҖҷ a wifeвҖҷs <i>ae son</i>, and a mearвҖҷs <i>ae foal,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Doun ye shall faвҖҷ!вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[See for illustration of the Brig oвҖҷ Balgownie, with its single Gothic arch, <i>Letters</i>, 1901 [L.P.], v. 406. ] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-820" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңLand of brown heath and shaggy wood,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Land of the mountain and the flood,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Lay of the Last Minstrel</i>, Canto VI. stanza ii.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-821" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Some thirty years before at fair eighteen.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Seven and twentyвҒ вҖ”<i>which</i>, it does not matterвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wrinkles, those damnedst democrats, wonвҖҷt flatter.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-822" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tiberius Gracchus, being tribune of the people, demanded in their name the execution of the Agrarian law; by which all persons possessing above a certain number of acres were to be deprived of the surplus for the benefit of the poor citizens. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-823" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңMi ritrovai per una selva oscura.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Inferno</i>, Canto I. line 2.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-824" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Hut where we travellers bait with dim reflection.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-825" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Is when he learns to limit his expenses.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-826" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вё»till the ice</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cracked, she would neвҖҷer believe in thaws for vice.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-827" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A metaphor taken from the вҖңforty-horse powerвҖқ of a steam-engine. That mad wag, the Reverend Sydney Smith, sitting by a brother clergyman at dinner, observed afterwards that his dull neighbour had a <i>вҖңtwelve-parson powerвҖқ</i> of conversation. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-828" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In a letter to his sister, October 25, 1804 (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 40), Byron mentions an auntвҒ вҖ”вҖңthe amiable antiquated Sophia,вҖқ and asks, вҖңIs she yet in the land of the living, or does she sing psalms with the Blessed in the other world?вҖқ This was his fatherвҖҷs sister, Sophia Maria, daughter of Admiral the Hon.В John Byron. But his вҖңgood old auntвҖқ is, more probably, the Hon.В Mrs.В Frances Byron, widow of George (born April 22, 1730) son of the fourth, and brother of the вҖңWickedвҖқ lord. She was the daughter and co-heiress of Ellis Levett, Esq., and lived вҖңat Nottingham in her own house.вҖқ She died, aged 86, June 13, 1822, not long before this Canto was written. She is described in the obituary notice of the <i>GentlemanвҖҷs Magazine</i>, June, 1822, vol. 92, p. 573, as вҖңDaughter of Vice-Admiral the Hon.В John Byron (who sailed round the world with Lord Anson), grandfather of the present Lord Byron.вҖқ But that is, chronologically, impossible. Byron must have retained a pleasing recollection of the ear-trumpet and the spectacles, and it gratified his kindlier humour to embalm their owner in his verse.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-829" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See CollinsвҖҷs <i>Peerage</i>, 1779, vii. 120. It is probable that Byron was lineally descended from Ralph de Burun, of Horestan, who is mentioned in Doomsday Book (sect. xi.) as holding eight lordships in Notts and five in Derbyshire, but with regard to Ernysius or Erneis the pedigree is silent. (See <i>Pedigree of George Gordon, Sixth Lord Byron</i>, by Edward Bernard, 1870.)] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-830" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңHyde.вҖқвҒ вҖ”I believe a hyde of land to be a legitimate word, and, as such, subject to the tax of a quibble. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-831" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And humbly hope that the same God which hath given</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Us land on earth, will do no less in Heaven.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-832" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>PerhapsвҒ вҖ”but dвҒ вҖ”n perhapsвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-833" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the illness (вҖңa scarlet fever, complicated by angina, both aggravated by premature exhaustionвҖқ) and death of LanskoГҜ, see <i>The Story of a Throne</i>, by K. Waliszewsky, 1895, ii. 131, 133. For the rumour that he was poisoned by Potemkin, see <i>MГ©moires Secrets, etc.</i> [by C.F.P. Masson], 1800, i. 170.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-834" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Matthew Baillie (1761вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823), the nephew of William Hunter, the brother of Agnes and Joanna Baillie, was a celebrated anatomist. He attended Byron (1799вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1802), when an endeavour was made to effect a cure of the muscular contraction of his right leg and foot. He was consulted by Lady Byron, in 1816, with regard to her husbandвҖҷs supposed derangement, but was not admitted when he called at the house in Piccadilly. He is said to have вҖңavoided technical and learned phrases; to have affected no sentimental tenderness, but expressed what he had to say in the simplest and plainest termsвҖқ (<i>Annual Biography</i>, 1824, p. 319). Jekyll (<i>Letters</i>, 1894, p. 110) repeats or invents an anecdote that вҖңthe old king, in his mad fits, used to say he could bring any dead people to converse with him, except those who had died under BaillieвҖҷs care, for that the doctor always dissected them into so many morsels, that they had not a leg to walk to Windsor with.вҖқ It is hardly necessary to say that John Abernethy (1764вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1831) вҖңexpressed what <i>he</i> had to sayвҖқ in the bluntest and rudest terms at his disposal.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-835" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The empress went to the Crimea, accompanied by the Emperor Joseph, in the yearвҒ вҖ”I forget which.</p>
					<p>[The Prince de Ligne, who accompanied Catherine in her progress through her southern provinces, in 1787, gives the following particulars: вҖңWe have crossed during many days vast, solitary regions, from which her Majesty has driven Zaporogua, Budjak, and Nogais Tartars, who, ten years ago, threatened to ravage her empire. All these places were furnished with magnificent tents for breakfasts, lunches, dinners, suppers, and sleeping-roomsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ deserted regions were at once transformed into fields, groves, villages:вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The Empress has left in each chief town gifts to the value of a hundred thousand roubles. Every day that we remained stationary was marked with diamonds, balls, fireworks, and illuminations throughout a circuit of ten leagues.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>The Prince de Ligne, His Memoirs, etc.</i>, translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley, 1899, ii. 31.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-836" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Man, midst thy mouldy mammoths, Cuvier.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-837" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Who like sour fruit to sharpen up the tides</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of their salt veins, and stir their stagnancy.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-838" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Empress AnneвҖҷs time, Biren, her favourite, assumed the name and arms of the вҖңBironsвҖқ of France; which families are yet extant with that of England. There are still the daughters of Courland of that name; one of them I remember seeing in England in the blessed year of the Allies (1814)вҒ вҖ”the Duchess of S.вҒ вҖ”to whom the English Duchess of Somerset presented me as a namesake.</p>
					<p>[вҖңErnest John Biren was born in Courland [in 1690]. His grandfather had been head groom to James, the third Duke of Courland, and obtained from his master the present of a small estate in land.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ In 1714 he made his appearance at St.В Petersburg, and solicited the place of page to the Princess Charlotte, wife of the Tzarovitch Alexey; but being contemptuously rejected as a person of mean extraction, retired to Mittau, where he chanced to ingratiate himself with Count Bestuchef, Master of the Household to Anne, widow of Frederic William, Duke of Courland, who resided at Mittau. Being of a handsome figure and polite address, he soon gained the good will of the duchess, and became her secretary and chief favourite. On her being declared sovereign of Russia, Anne called Biren to Petersburg, and the secretary soon became Duke of Courland, and first minister or rather despot of Russia. On the death of Anne, which happened in 1740, Biren, being declared regent, continued daily increasing his vexations and cruelties, till he was arrested, on the 18th of December, only twenty days after he had been appointed to the regency; and at the revolution that ensued he was exiled to the frozen shores of the Oby.вҖқ <i>Catherine II.</i>, by W. Tooke, 1800, i. 160, <i>footnote</i>. He was recalled in 1763, and died in 1772.</p>
					<p>In a letter to his sister, dated June 18, 1814, Byron gives a slightly different version of the incident, recorded in his note (<i>vide supra</i>): вҖңThe Duchess of Somerset also, to mend matters, insisted on presenting me to a Princess <i>Biron</i>, Duchess of Hohen-God-knows-what, and another person to her two sisters, Birons too. But I flew off, and <i>would</i> not, saying I had had enough of introductions for that night at least.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 98. The вҖңdaughters of CourlandвҖқ must have been descendants of вҖңPierre, dernier Duc de Courlande, De la Maison de Biron,вҖқ viz. Jeanne CathГ©rine, born June 24, 1783, who married, in 1801, FranГ§ois Pignatelli de Belmonte, Duc dвҖҷAcerenza, and DorothГ©e, born August 21, 1793, who married, in 1809, Edmond de Talleyrand PГ©rigord, Duc de Talleyrand, nephew to the Bishop of Autun. (See <i>Almanach de Gotha</i>, 1848, pp. 109, 110.)] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-839" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[NapoleonвҖҷs exclamation at the ElysГ©e Bourbon, June 23, 1815. вҖңWhen his civil counsellors talked of defence, the word wrung from him the bitter ejaculation, вҖҳAh! my old guard! could they but defend themselves like you!вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Life of Napoleon Buonaparte</i>, by Sir Walter Scott, <i>Prose Works</i>, 1846, ii. 760.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-840" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Who now that he is dead has not a foe;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The last expired in cut-throat Castlereagh.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-841" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Immanuel Kant, born at KГ¶nigsberg, in 1729, became Professor and Rector of the University, and died at KГ¶nigsberg in 1804.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-842" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThe castled crag of Drachenfels</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Frowns oвҖҷer the wide and winding Rhine,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto III.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-843" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>St.В Ursula and her eleven thousand virgins were still extant in 1816, and may be so yet, as much as ever. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-844" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe left Ratzeburg at 7 oвҖҷclock Wednesday evening, and arrived at LГјneburgвҒ вҖ”<i>i.e.</i> 35 English milesвҒ вҖ”at 3 oвҖҷclock on Thursday afternoon. This is a fair specimen! In England I used to laugh at the вҖҳflying waggons;вҖҷ but compared with a German Post-Coach, the metaphor is perfectly justifiable, and for the future I shall never meet a flying waggon without thinking respectfully of its speed.вҖқвҒ вҖ”S.T. Coleridge, March 12, 1799, <i>Letters of S.T.C.</i>, 1895, i. 278.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-845" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See for German oaths, вҖңExtracts from a Diary,вҖқ January 12, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 172.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-846" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With вҖңSchnappsвҖқвҒ вҖ”Democritus would cease to smile,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By German, post-boys driven a mile.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With вҖңSchnappsвҖқвҒ вҖ”and spite of вҖңDamвҖҷem,вҖқ вҖңdogвҖқ and вҖңlogвҖқ</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Launched at their heads jog-jog-jog-jog-jog-jog.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-847" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The French Inscription (see <i>Memorial Inscriptions</i>, etc., by Joseph Meadows Cowper, 1897, p. 134) on the Black PrinceвҖҷs monument is thus translated in the <i>History of Kent</i> (John WeeversвҖҷ <i>Funerall Monuments</i>, 1636, pp. 205, 206)вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWho so thou be that passeth by</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where this corps entombed lie,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Understand what I shall say,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As at this time, speake I may.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such as thou art, sometime was I.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such as I am, shalt thou be.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I little thought on thвҖҷ oure of death,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So long as I enjoyГ©d breath.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Great riches here did I possess,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereof I made great nobleness;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I had gold, silver, wardrobes, and</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Great treasure, horses, houses, land.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But now a caitife poore am I,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Deepe in the ground, lo! here I lie;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My beautie great is all quite gone,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My flesh is wasted to the bone.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My house is narrow now and throng,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nothing but Truth comes from my tongue.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And if ye should see me this day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I do not think but ye would say,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I had never beene a man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So much altered now I am.вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-848" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ of higher stations,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And for their pains get smarter puncturations.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-849" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto I. stanza xxxii. line 2, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 93, note 16.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-850" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>The Prince</i> (<i>Il Principe</i>), chap. xvii., by NiccolГІ Machiavelli, translated by Ninian Hill Thomson, 1897, p. 121: вҖңBut above all [a Prince] must abstain from the property of others. For men will sooner forget the death of their father than the loss of their patrimony.вҖқ] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-851" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[India; America.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-852" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Elizabeth Fry (1780вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1845) began her visits to Newgate in 1813. In 1820 she corresponded with the Princess Sophie of Russia, and at a later period she was entertained by Louis Philippe, and by the King of Prussia at Kaiserwerth. She might have, she may have, admonished George IV. вҖңwith regard to all good things.вҖқ] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-853" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 768, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 578, note 1.] <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-854" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңO for a blast of that dread horn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">On Fontarabian echoes borne,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i6">That to King Charles did come,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">When Rowland brave, and Olivier,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And every paladin and peer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i6">On Roncesvalles died.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Marmion</i>, Canto VI. stanza xxxiii. lines 7вҒ вҖ“вҒ 12.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-855" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Like an old Roman trumpet ere a battle.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-856" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Genoa, Oct. 6<sup>th</sup>, 1822. End of Canto 10<sup>th</sup>. <a href="canto-10.xhtml#noteref-857" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 11-->
				<li id="note-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Berkeley did not deny the reality of existence, but the reality of matter as an abstract conception. вҖңIt is plain,вҖқ he says (<i>On the Principles of Human Knowledge</i>, sect. ix.), вҖңthat the very notion of what is called <i>matter</i> or <i>corporeal substance</i>, involves a contradiction in it.вҖқ Again, вҖңIt were a mistake to think that what is here said derogates in the least from the reality of things.вҖқ His contention was that this <i>reality</i> depended, not on an abstraction <i>called</i> matter, вҖңan inert, extended unperceiving substance,вҖқ but on вҖңthose unextended, indivisible substances or <i>spirits</i>, which act, and think, and perceive them [unthinking beings].вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Ibid.</i>, sect. xci., <i>The Works</i> of George Berkeley, D.D., 1820, i. 27, 69, 70.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-858" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Tempest</i>, act v. sc. i, line 95.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-859" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI have been very unwellвҒ вҖ”four days confined to my bed in вҖҳthe worst innвҖҷs worst roomвҖҷ at Lerici, with a violent rheumatic and bilious attack, constipation, and the devil knows what.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Murray, October 9, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 121. The same letter contains an announcement that he had вҖңa fifth [Canto of <i>Don Juan</i>] (the 10th) finished, but not transcribed yet; and the <i>eleventh</i> begun.вҖқ] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-860" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Or Rome, or TiberвҒ вҖ”Naples or the sea.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-861" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide ante</i>, <a>Canto I. stanza xiv</a>. lines 7, 8.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-862" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖң<i>Falstaff</i>. Let us be DianaвҖҷs foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon: and let men say, we be men of good government; being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance weвҒ вҖ”steal.вҖқ-<i>I Henry IV.</i>, act i. sc. 2, lines 24вҒ вҖ“вҒ 28.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-863" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Gin. Hence the antithesis of <i>вҖңAll MaxвҖқ</i> in the East to AlmackвҖҷs in the West. (See <i>Life in London</i>, by Pierce Egan, 1823, pp. 284вҒ вҖ“вҒ 290.)] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-864" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[According to the <i>Vocabulary of the Flash Language</i>, compiled by James Hardy Vaux, in 1812, and published at the end of his Memoirs, 1819, ii. 149вҒ вҖ“вҒ 227, a kiddy, or вҖңflash-kiddy,вҖқ is a thief of the lower orders, who, when he is <i>breeched</i> by a course of successful depredation dresses in the extreme of vulgar gentility, and affects a knowingness in his air and conversation. A вҖңswellвҖқ or вҖңrank swellвҖқ (вҖң<i>real</i> swellвҖқ appears in EganвҖҷs <i>Life in London</i>) is the more recent вҖңtoff;вҖқ and вҖңflashвҖқ is вҖңfly,вҖқ вҖңdown,вҖқ or вҖңawake,вҖқ <i>i.e.</i> knowing, not easily imposed upon.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-865" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act v. sc. 1, line 21.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-866" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңKenвҖқ is a house, s.c. a thievesвҖҷ lodging-house; вҖңspellken,вҖқ a play-house; вҖңhigh toby-spiceвҖқ is robbery on horseback, as distinguished from вҖңspice,вҖқ i.e. footpad robbery; to вҖңflash the muzzleвҖқ is to show off the face, to swagger openly; вҖңblowingвҖқ or вҖңblowenвҖқ is a doxy or trull; and вҖңnuttyвҖқ is, conjointly, amorous and fascinating.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-867" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Poor Tom was once a knowing one in town.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not a mere <i>kiddy</i>, but a <i>real</i> one.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-868" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The advance of science and of language has rendered it unnecessary to translate the above good and true English, spoken in its original purity by the select mobility and their patrons. The following is a stanza of a song which was very popular at least in my early days:вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңOn the high toby-spice flash the muzzle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">In spite of each gallows old scout;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If you at the spellken canвҖҷt hustle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">YouвҖҷll be hobbled in making a clout.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then your blowing will wax gallows haughty,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">When she hears of your scaly mistake,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>SheвҖҷll surely turn snitch for the fortyвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">That her Jack may be regular weight.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>If there be any gemman so ignorant as to require a traduction, I refer him to my old friend and corporeal pastor and master, John Jackson, Esq., Professor of Pugilism; who, I trust, still retains the strength and symmetry of his model of a form, together with his good humour, and athletic as well as mental accomplishments.</p>
					<p>[Gentleman Jackson was of good renown. вҖңServility,вҖқ says Egan (<i>Life in London</i>, 1823, p. 217), вҖңis not known to him. Flattery he detests. Integrity, impartiality, good-nature, and manliness, are the corner-stones of his understanding.вҖқ Byron once said of him that вҖңhis manners were infinitely superior to those of the Fellows of the College whom I meet at the high tableвҖқ (J.W. Clark, <i>Cambridge</i>, 1890, p. 140). (See, too, letter to John Jackson, September 18, 1808, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 189, note 2; <i>Hints from Horace</i>, line 638, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 433, note 3.) As to the stanza quoted by Egan (<i>Anecdotes of the Turf</i>, 1827, p. 44), but not <i>traduced</i> or interpreted, вҖңTo be hobbled for making a cloutвҖқ is to be taken into custody for stealing a handkerchief, to вҖңturn snitchвҖқ is to inform, and the вҖңfortyвҖқ is the ВЈ40 offered for the detection of a capital crime, and shared by the police or Bow Street runners. Dangerous characters were let alone and tacitly encouraged to continue their career of crime, until the measure of their iniquity was full, and they вҖңweighed forty.вҖқ If Jack was clumsy enough to be detected in a trifling theft, his вҖңblowenвҖқ would go over to the enemy, and betray him for the sake of the Government reward (see <i>Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue</i>, by Francis Grose, 1823, art. вҖңWeigh fortyвҖқ).] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-869" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Don Juan must have driven by <i>Pleasant Row</i>, and passed within hail of <i>Paradise Row</i>, on the way from Kennington to Westminster Bridge. (See CaryвҖҷs <i>New Pocket Plan of London, Westminster, and Southwark</i>, 1819.) But, perhaps, there is more in the names of streets and places than meets the eye. Here, as elsewhere, there is, or there may be, вҖңa paltering with us in a double sense.вҖқ] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-870" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Through rows called вҖңParadise,вҖқ by way of showing</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Good Christians that to which they all are going.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-871" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto 1. stanza lxix. line 8, <i>var.</i> ii., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 66, note 2.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-872" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ distilling into the re-kindling glass.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-873" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The streets of London were first regularly lighted with gas in 1812.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-874" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Thomas Pennant, in <i>Some Account of London</i>, 1793, p. 444, writes down the Mansion House (1739вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1752) as вҖңdamnedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to everlasting fame.вҖқ] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-875" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Fifty years ago вҖңthe lights of PiccadillyвҖқ were still regarded as one of the вҖңsightsвҖқ of London. Byron must often have looked at them from his house in Piccadilly Terrace.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-876" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Joseph FranГ§ois Foulon, army commissioner, provoked the penalty of the вҖңlanternвҖқ (i.e. an improvised gallows on the yard of a lamp-post at the corner of the Rue de la Vannerie) by his heartless sneer, вҖңEh bien! si cette canaille nвҖҷa pas de pain, elle mangera du foin.вҖқ He was hanged, July 22, 1789. See <i>The Tale of Two Cities</i>, by Charles Dickens, cap. xxii.; see, too, CarlyleвҖҷs <i>French Revolution</i>, 1839, i. 253: вҖңWith wild yells, Sansculottism clutches him, in its hundred hands: he is whirledвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to the <i>вҖҳLanterne,вҖҷ</i>вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ pleading bitterly for lifeвҒ вҖ”to the deaf winds. Only with the third rope (for two ropes broke, and the quavering voice still pleaded), can he be so much as got hanged! His Body is dragged through the streets; his Head goes aloft on a pike, the mouth filled with grass: amid sounds as of Tophet, from a grass-eating people.вҖқ] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-877" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңHells,вҖқ gaming-houses. What their number may now be in this life, I know not. Before I was of age I knew them pretty accurately, both вҖңgoldвҖқ and вҖңsilver.вҖқ I was once nearly called out by an acquaintance, because when he asked me where I thought that his soul would be found hereafter, I answered, вҖңIn Silver Hell.вҖқ <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-878" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>At length the boys drew up before a door,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">From whence poured forth a tribe of well-clad waiters;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(While on the pavement many a hungry wвҒ вҖ”re</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">With which the moralest of cities caters</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For gentlemen whose passions may boil oвҖҷer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Stood as the unpacking gathered more spectators,)</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Juan found himself in an extensive</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Apartment;вҒ вҖ”fashionable but expensive.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-879" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖҷTwas one of the delightfullest hotels.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-880" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Perhaps GrillionвҖҷs Hotel (afterwards GrillionвҖҷs Club) in Albemarle Street. In 1822 diplomats patronized more than one hotel in and near St.В JamesвҖҷs Street, but among the вҖңDepartures from GrillionвҖҷs Hotel,вҖқ recorded in the <i>Morning Chronicle</i> of September, 17, 1822, appositely enough, is that of H.E. Don Juan Garcia, del Rio.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-881" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ of his loves and wars;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And as romantic heads are pretty painters,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And ladies like a little spice of Mars.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-882" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The false attempt at TruthвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-883" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i16">вҖңLo! Erin, thy Lord!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Kiss his foot with thy blessingвҖқвҒ вёәвҒ </span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>The Irish Avatar</i>, stanza 14, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 558.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-884" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Kiss handsвҒ вҖ”or feetвҒ вҖ”or what Man by and by</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>Will</i> kiss, not in sad metaphorвҒ вҖ”but earnest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unless on TyrantsвҖҷ sternsвҒ вҖ”we turn the sternest.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-885" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңAnentвҖқ was a Scotch phrase meaning вҖңconcerningвҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңwith regard to: вҖңit has been made English by the Scotch novels; and, as the Frenchman said, вҖңIf it <i>be not, ought to be</i> English.вҖқ [See, for instance, <i>The Abbot</i>, chap. xvii. 132.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-886" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But вҖңDammeвҖҷsвҖқ simpleвҒ вҖ”dashingвҒ вҖ”free and daring</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The purest blasphemyвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-887" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>About such general mattersвҒ вҖ”but particular</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A poemвҖҷs progress should be perpendicular.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-888" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 4, line 63.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-889" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Blushed, too, but it was hidden by their rouge.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-890" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The natural and the prepared ceruse.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-891" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңDrapery Misses.вҖқвҒ вҖ”This term is probably anything now but a <i>mystery</i>. It was, however, almost so to me when I first returned from the East in 1811вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1812. It means a pretty, a high-born, a fashionable young female, well instructed by her friends, and furnished by her milliner with a wardrobe upon credit, to be repaid, when married, by the <i>husband</i>. The riddle was first read to me by a young and pretty heiress, on my praising the вҖңdraperyвҖқ of the <i>вҖңuntocheredвҖқ</i> but вҖңpretty virginitiesвҖқ (like Mrs.В Anne Page) of the <i>then</i> day, which has now been some years yesterday: she assured me that the thing was common in London; and as her own thousands, and blooming looks, and rich simplicity of array, put any suspicion in her own case out of the question, I confess I gave some credit to the allegation. If necessary, authorities might be cited; in which case I could quote both вҖңdraperyвҖқ and the wearers. Let us hope, however, that it is now obsolete. <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-892" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Hints from Horace</i>, line 173, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 401, note 1.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-893" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his so-called вҖңDedicationвҖқ of <i>Marino Faliero</i> to Goethe, Byron makes fun of the вҖңnineteen hundred and eighty-seven poets,вҖқ whose names were to be found in <i>A Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors, etc.</i> (See Introduction to <i>Marino Faliero, Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 340, 341, note 1.)] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-894" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A paper potentateвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-895" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See вҖңIntroduction to <i>Cain</i>,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 204.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-896" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With turnkey Southey for my Hudson Lowe.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-897" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Beneath the reverend Cambyses Croly.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-898" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Reverend George Croly, D.D. (1780вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1860), began his literary career as dramatic critic of the <i>Times</i>. вҖңCroly,вҖқ says H.C. Robinson (<i>Diary</i>, 1869, i. 412), вҖңis a fierce-looking Irishman, very lively in conversation, and certainly has considerable talents as a writer; his eloquence, like his person, is rather energetic than eloquentвҖқ (hence the epithet вҖңCambyses,вҖқ i.e. вҖңKing CambysesвҖҷ veinвҖқ in <i>var.</i> iii.). вҖңHe wrote tragedies, comedies, and novels; and, at last, settled down as a preacher, with the rank of doctor, but of what faculty I do not knowвҖқ (ibid., footnote, H.C.R., 1847). He wrote, <i>inter alia</i>, <i>Paris in 1815</i>, a poem; <i>Catiline, A Tragedy</i>, 1822; and <i>Salathiel</i>, a novel, 1827. In lines 7, 8, Byron seems to refer to <i>The Angel of the World, An Arabian Poem</i>, published in 1820.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-899" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>I Henry IV.</i>, act ii. sc. 4, line 197.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-900" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanza lviii. was first published in 1837. The reference is to Henry Hart Milman (1791вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1868). Byron was under the impression that Milman had influenced Murray against continuing the publication of <i>Don Juan</i>. Added to this surmise, was the mistaken belief that it was Milman who had written the article in the <i>Quarterly</i>, which вҖңkilled John Keats.вҖқ Hence the virulence of the attack.</p>
					<p>вҖңDull DorusвҖқ is obscure, but compare Propertius, <i>Eleg.</i> III. vii. 44, where Callimachus is addressed as вҖңDore poeta.вҖқ He is the вҖңox of verse,вҖқ because he had been recently appointed to the Professorship of Poetry at Oxford. The вҖңroaring RomansвҖқ are вҖңThe soldieryвҖқ who shout вҖңAll, All,вҖқ in CrolyвҖҷs <i>Catiline</i>, act v. sc. 2.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-901" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Then thereвҖҷs my gentle BarryвҒ вҖ”who they say.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-902" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Jeffrey, in his review of <i>A Sicilian Story, etc.</i>, Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall), 1787вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1874 (<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, January, 1820, vol. 33, pp. 144вҒ вҖ“вҒ 155), compares <i>Diego de Montilla</i>, a poem in <i>ottava rima</i>, with <i>Don Juan</i>, favourably and unfavourably: вҖңThere is no profligacy and no horrorвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ no mocking of virtue and honour, and no strong mixtures of buffoonery and grandeur.вҖқ But it may fairly match with Byron and his Italian models вҖңas to the better qualities of elegance, delicacy, and tenderness.вҖқ See, too, <i>BlackwoodвҖҷs Edinburgh Magazine</i>, March, 1820, vol. vi. pp. 153, 647.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-903" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See Preface to the <i>Vision of Judgment, Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 484, note 3.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-904" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CrokerвҖҷs article in the <i>Quarterly</i> (April, 1818 [pub. September], vol. xix. pp. 204вҒ вҖ“вҒ 208) did not вҖңkill John Keats.вҖқ See letter to George and Georgiana Keats, October, 1818 (<i>Letters, etc.</i>, 1895, p. 215). Byron adopts ShelleyвҖҷs belief that the Reviewer, вҖңmiserable man,вҖқ вҖңone of the meanest,вҖқ had вҖңwantonly defaced one of the noblest specimens of the workmanship of God.вҖқ See Preface to <i>Adonais</i>, and stanzas xxxvi., xxxvii.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-905" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And weakly mind, to let that all celestial Particle.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖҳT is strange the mind should let such phrases quell its</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Chief Impulse with a few, frail, paper pellets.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-906" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңDivinГҰ particulam aurГҰвҖқ [Hor., <i>Sat.</i> ii. 2. 79] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-907" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңthe crowd of usurpersвҖқ who started up in the reign of Gallienus, and were dignified with the honoured appellation of вҖңthe thirty tyrants,вҖқ see GibbonвҖҷs <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 1825, i. 164.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-908" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>King Lear</i>, act iv. sc. 6, line 15.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-909" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңIllita Nesseo misi tibi texta veneno.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Ovid., <i>Heroid. Epist</i>. ix. 163.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-910" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[A вҖңbower,вҖқ in MooreвҖҷs phrase, signifies a solitude <i>Г  deux</i>; e.g. вҖңHereвҖҷs the Bower she lovвҖҷd so much.вҖқ</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңCome to me, love, the twilight star</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall guide thee to my bower.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Moore.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-911" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Waltz</i>, lines 220вҒ вҖ“вҒ 229, <i>et passim</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 501.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-912" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scotch for goblin. <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-913" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Handsome but <i>blasГ©</i>вҒ вёәвҒ </span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-914" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The sentiment is reiterated in <i>The Night Thoughts</i>, and is the theme of <i>Resignation</i>, which was written and published when Young was more than eighty years old. ] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-915" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And fresher, since without a breath of air.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-916" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Where are the thousand lovely innocents?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-917" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңI haveвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ writtenвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to express my willingness to accept the, or almost any mortgage, any thing to get out of the tremulous Funds of these oscillating times. There will be a war somewhere, no doubtвҒ вҖ”and whatever it may be, the Funds will be affected more or less; so pray get us out of them with all proper expedition. It has been the burthen of my song to you three years and better, and about as useful as better counsels.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter of Byron to Kinnaird, January 18, 1823, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 162, 163.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-918" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For William Pole Tylney Long Wellesley (1788вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1857), see <i>The Waltz</i>, line 21, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 484, note 1. He was only on the way to being вҖңdiddledвҖқ in 1822, but the prophecy (suggested, no doubt, by the announcement of the sale of furniture, etc., at Wanstead House, in the <i>Morning Chronicle</i>, July 8, 1822) was ultimately fulfilled. Samuel Whitbread, born 1758, committed suicide July 6, 1815. Sir Samuel Romilly, born 1758, committed suicide November 2, 1818.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-919" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[According to Charles Greville, George the Third made two willsвҒ вҖ”the first in 1770, the second, which he never signed, in 1810. By the first will he left вҖңall he had to the Queen for her life, Buckingham House to the Duke of Clarence,вҖқ etc., and as Buckingham House had been twice sold, and the other legatees were dead, a question arose between the King and the Duke of York as to the right of inheritance of their fatherвҖҷs personal property. George IV. conceived that it devolved upon him personally, and not on the Crown, and вҖңconsequently appropriated to himself the whole of the money and the jewels.вҖқ It is possible that this difference between the brothers was noised abroad, and that old stories of the destruction of royal wills were revived to the new kingвҖҷs discredit. (See <i>The Greville Memoirs</i>, 1875, i. 64, 65.)] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-920" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See MooreвҖҷs <i>Fum and Hum, the Two Birds of Royalty</i>, appended to his <i>Fudge Family</i>.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-921" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lady Caroline Lamb and Lady Frances Wedderburn Webster.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-922" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ their caps and curls at Dukes.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-923" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Congress at Verona, in 1822. See the Introduction to <i>The Age of Bronze, Poetical Works</i>, 1891, v. 537вҒ вҖ“вҒ 540.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-924" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>2 Henry IV.</i>, act iv. sc. 3, line 117.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-925" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Od.</i> I. xi. line 8.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-926" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Macbeth</i>, act v. sc. 5, line 24.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-927" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>1 Henry IV.</i>, act ii. sc. 4, line 463.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-928" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See the <i>Secret Memoirs and Manners of several Persons of Quality, of Both Sexes, from the New Atalantis</i>, 1709, a work in which the authoress, Mrs.В Manley, satirizes the distinguished characters of her day. Warburton (<i>Works of Pope</i>, ed. 1751, i. 244) calls it вҖңa famous bookвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ full of court and party scandal, and in a loose effeminacy of style and sentiment, which well suited the debauched taste of the better vulgar.вҖқ Pope also alludes to it in the <i>Rape of the Lock</i>, iii. 165, 166вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңAs long as <i>Atalantis</i> shall be read,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or the small pillow grace a ladyвҖҷs bed.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And Swift, in his ballad on вҖңCorinnaвҖқ (stanza 8)вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңHer common-place book all gallant is,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of scandal now a cornucopia,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She pours it out in <i>Atalantis,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Or memoirs of the New Utopia.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Works</i>, 1824, xii. 302.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-929" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Oct. 17, 1822.вҒ вҖ”MS.] <a href="canto-11.xhtml#noteref-930" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 12-->
				<li id="note-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See letter to Douglas Kinnaird, dated Genoa, January 18, 1823.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-931" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Johnson would not believe that вҖңa complete miser is a happy man.вҖқ вҖңThat,вҖқ he said, вҖңis flying in the face of all the world, who have called an avaricious man a <i>miser</i>, because he is miserable. No, sir; a man who both spends and saves money is the happiest man, because he has both enjoyments.вҖқвҒ вҖ”BoswellвҖҷs <i>Life of Johnson</i>, 1876, p. 605.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-932" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The <i>Descamisados</i>, or Sansculottes of the Spanish Revolution of 1820вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823. For Spanish вҖңLiberals,вҖқ see <i>Quarterly Review</i>, April, 1823, vol. xxix. pp. 270вҒ вҖ“вҒ 276.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-933" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act i. sc. 1, line 116.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-934" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, line 678, sq., <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 573, note 3.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-935" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Jacques Laffitte (1767вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1844), as Governor of the Bank of France, advanced sums to Parisians to meet their enforced contributions to the allies, and, in 1817, advocated liberal measures as a Deputy.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-936" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Were not worth one whereon their profile shines.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-937" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThey say that вҖҳKnowledge is PowerвҖҷ;вҒ вҖ”I used to think so; but I now know that they meant MoneyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ every guinea is a philosopherвҖҷs stone, or at least his <i>touch</i>-stone. You will doubt me the less, when I pronounce my pious beliefвҒ вҖ”that <i>Cash is Virtue</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Kinnaird, February 6, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 11.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-938" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Lay of the Last Minstrel</i>, Canto III. stanza ii. lines 4вҒ вҖ“вҒ 6.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-939" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See GodwinвҖҷs Essay <i>Of Population</i>, 1820 (pp. 18, 19, <i>et passim</i>), in which he renews his attack on MalthusвҖҷs <i>Essay on the Principles of Population</i>.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-940" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe have no notion that Lord B[yron] had any mischievous intention in these publicationsвҒ вҖ”and readily acquit him of any wish to corrupt the morals, or impair the happiness of his readersвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but it is our dutyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to say, that much of what he has published appears to us to have this tendency.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ How opposite to this is the system, or the temper, of the great author of Waverley!вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, February, 1822, vol. 36, p. 451.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-941" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ for his moral pen</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Held up to me by Jeffrey as example.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of which with profitвҒ вҖ”as youвҖҷll soon see by a sample.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-942" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In the case of Murray v. Benbow (February 9, 1822), the Lord Chancellor (Lord Eldon) refused the motion for an injunction to restrain the defendant from publishing a pirated edition of Lord ByronвҖҷs poem of Cain (JacobвҖҷs <i>Reports</i>, p. 474, note). Hence (see <i>var.</i> i.) the allusion to вҖңLawвҖқ and вҖңEquity.вҖқ The вҖңsuitвҖқ and the вҖңappealвҖқ (<i>vide ibid.</i>) refer to legal proceedings taken, or intended to be taken, with regard to certain questions arising out of the disposition of property under Lady NoelвҖҷs will. (See letters to Charles Hanson, September 21, November 30, 1822, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 115, 146.)] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-943" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That suit in ChanceryвҒ вҖ”have a Chancery suitвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">In right good earnestвҒ вҖ”also an appeal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Before the Lords, whose ChancellorвҖҷs more acute</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">In Law than EquityвҒ вҖ”as I can feel</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Because my Cases put his Lordship to вҖҳt</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">AndвҒ вҖ”though no doubt вҖҳt is for the Public weal,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His LordshipвҖҷs Justice is not that of SolomonвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not that I deem our Chief Judge is a hollow man.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-944" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See [William] MitfordвҖҷs Greece (1829, v. 314, 315), <i>вҖңGrГҰcia Verax.вҖқ</i> His great pleasure consists in praising tyrants, abusing Plutarch, spelling oddly, and writing quaintly; and what is strange, after all, <i>his</i> is the best modern history of Greece in any language, and he is perhaps the best of all modern historians whatsoever. Having named his sins, it is but fair to state his virtuesвҒ вҖ”learning, labour, research, wrath, and partiality. I call the latter virtues in a writer, because they make him write in earnest.</p>
					<p>[Byron consulted Mitford when he was at work on <i>Sardanapalus</i>. (See Extracts from a Diary, January 5, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 152, note 1.)] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-945" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Thomas Robert Malthus (1766вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1834) married, in 1804, Harriet, daughter of John Eckersall of Claverton House, near Bath. There were three children of the marriage, of whom two survived him. Byron may be alluding to the apocryphal story of вҖңhis eleven daughters,вҖқ related by J.L.A. Cherbuliez, in the <i>Journal des Гүconomistes</i> (1850, vol. xxv. p. 135): вҖңUn soirвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ il y avait cercle chez M. de Sismondi, Г  sa maison de campagne prГЁs de GenГЁve.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Enfin, on annonce le <i>rГ©vГ©rend Malthus et sa famille</i>. Sa famille!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Alors on voit entrer une charmante jeune fille, puis une seconde, puis une troisiГЁme, puis une quatriГЁme, puisвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Il nвҖҷy en avait, ma fois, pas moins de onze!вҖқ See <i>Malthus and his Work</i>, by James Bonar, 1885, pp. 412, 413. See, too, <i>Nouveau Dictionnaire de LвҖҷГүconomie Politique</i>, 1892, art. вҖңMalthus.вҖқ] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-946" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңHow commentators each dark passage shun,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And hold their farthing candle to the sun.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Love of Fame, the Universal Passion</i>, by Edward Young, <i>Sat</i>. vii. lines 97, 98.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-947" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Philo-<i>pro</i>genitiveness. Spurzheim and Gall discover the organ of this name in a bump behind the ears, and say it is remarkably developed in the bull.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-948" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>He played and paid, made love without much sin.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-949" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Themselves on seldom yielding to temptation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-950" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Henry Hallam (1778вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1859) published his <i>View of the State of Europe in the Middle Ages</i> in 1818.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-951" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A drunken Gentleman of fortyвҖҷs sure.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-952" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This line may puzzle the commentators more than the present generation. <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-953" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>If he can hiccup nonsense at a ball.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>or,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>If he goes after dinner to a ball.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-954" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>As You Like It</i>, act ii. sc. 7, line 156; and <i>Hamlet</i>, act ii. sc. 2, lines, 97, 98.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-955" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But first of little LeilahвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-956" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the allusion to вҖңunsunned snows,вҖқ <i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 275, note 1</a>.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-957" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The reference may be to Hobhouse and the вҖңZoili of Albemarle Street,вҖқ who did their best to вҖңtutorвҖқ him with regard to вҖңblazing indiscretionsвҖқ in <i>Don Juan</i>.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-958" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>ThatвҒ вҖ”but I will not listen, by your leave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1"><i>Unto a single syllable</i>вҒ вёә.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-959" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For another instance of this curious mistake, see letter to Hodgson, December 8, 1811, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 85; et ibid., p. 31, note 1.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-960" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Painted and gildedвҒ вҖ”or, as it will tell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More Muse-likeвҒ вҖ”sayвҒ вҖ”like CythereaвҖҷs shell.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-961" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide ante</i>, Preface to Cantos VI., VII., and VIII., <a>p. 266</a>.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-962" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңEnfin partout la bonne sociГ©tГ© rГ©gle tout.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Voltaire.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-963" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThis game originated, I believe, in Germany.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It is called the game of the <i>goose</i>, because at every fourth and fifth compartment of the table in succession a <i>goose</i> is depicted; and if the cast thrown by the player falls upon a <i>goose</i>, he moves forward double the number of his throwвҖқ (<i>Sports and Pastimes, etc.</i>, by Joseph Strutt, 1801, p. 250).</p>
					<p>Goldsmith, in his <i>Deserted Village</i>, among other вҖңparlour splendours,вҖқ mentions вҖңthe twelve good rules, the royal game of goose.вҖқ] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-964" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Most young beginners may be taken so,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But those who have been a little used to roughing</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Know how to end this half-and-half flirtation.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-965" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңIвҖҷll grow a talker for this gear.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Merchant of Venice</i>, act i. sc. 1, line 110.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-966" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Country where warm young peopleвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-967" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Pope and Scott use the quasi-contracted вҖңgynocracyвҖқ for вҖңgynГҰcocracy.вҖқ (See <i>N. Engl. Dict.</i>)] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-968" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Of white cliffsвҒ вҖ”and white bosomsвҒ вҖ”and blue eyesвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And stockingsвҒ вҖ”virtues, loves and Chastities.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-969" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Epist.</i>, lib. 1, ep. xiv. line 43. The meaning is that Europe makes but little progress in the discovery and settlement of Africa, and, as it were, вҖңploughs the sands.вҖқ] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-970" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Though many thousands both of birth and pluck too,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Have ventured past the jaws of Moor and Tiger.[*]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[*]<i>Note. By particular licence, вҖңpositively for the last time, by desire,вҖқ etc., to be pronounced вҖңtydger.вҖқ Such is what Gifford calls вҖңthe necessity of rhyming.вҖқ</i>вҒ вҖ”[MS. erased.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-971" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThough many degrees nearer our own fair and blue-eyed beauties in complexionвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ yet no people ever lost more by comparison than did the white ladies of Moorzuk [capital of Fezzan] with the black ones of Bornou and Soudan.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Narrative of TravelsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ in Northern and Central Africa</i>, 1822вҒ вҖ“вҒ 24, by Denham, Clapperton, and Oudney, 1828, ii. 133.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-972" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Above, all sunshine, and, below, all ice.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-973" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Prisoner of Chillon</i>, lines 82вҒ вҖ“вҒ 85, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 17.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-974" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Russians, as is well known, run out from their hot baths to plunge into the Neva; a pleasant practical antithesis, which it seems does them no harm. <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-975" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But once there (few have felt this more than I).</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-976" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto II. stanza lviii. line 9, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 59, note 1.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-977" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See PlutarchвҖҷs <i>Caius Marius</i>, LanghorneвҖҷs translation, 1838, pp. 304, 305.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-978" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That Lady who is not at home to all.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-979" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a description and print of this inhabitant of the polar region and native country of the Aurorae Boreales, see Sir E. ParryвҖҷs <i>Voyage In Search of a North-West Passage</i>, [1821, p. 257. The print of the Musk-Bull is drawn and engraved by W. Westall, A.R.A., from a sketch by Lieut.В Beechy. He is a вҖңfearful wild-fowl!вҖқ] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-980" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Charles, second Earl Grey, born March 13, 1764, succeeded to the peerage in 1807, died July 17, 1847.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-981" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[William Pitt, first Earl of Chatham, born November 15, 1708, died May 11, 1778.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-982" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHis person was undoubtedly cast by Nature in an elegant and pleasing mould, of a just height, well-proportioned, and with due regard to symmetry.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ His countenance was handsome and prepossessing.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ His manners were captivating, noble, and dignified, yet unaffectedly condescending.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Homer, as well as Virgil, was familiar to the Prince of Wales; and his memory, which was very tenacious, enabled him to cite with graceful readiness the favourite passages of either poet.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>The HistoricalвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Memoirs</i> of Sir N.W. Wraxall, 1884, v. 353, 354.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-983" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWaving myself, let me talk to you of the Prince Regent. He ordered me to be presented to him at a ball; and after some sayings peculiarly pleasing from royal lips, as to my own attempts, he talked to me of you and your immortalities; he preferred you to every other bard past and present.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He spoke alternately of Homer and yourself, and seemed well acquainted with both.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ [All] this was conveyed in language which would only suffer by my attempting to transcribe it, and with a tone and taste which gave me a very high idea of his abilities and accomplishments, which I had hitherto considered as confined to <i>manners</i> certainly superior to those of any living <i>gentleman</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to Sir Walter Scott, July 6, 1812, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 134.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-984" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. 10<sup>bre</sup> 7<sup>th</sup> 1822.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</p>
					<p>A sculptor projected to hew Mount Athos into a statue of Alexander, with a city in one hand, and, I believe, a river in his pocket, with various other similar devices. But AlexanderвҖҷs gone, and Athos remains, I trust ere long to look over a nation of freemen.</p>
					<p>[It was an architect named Stasicrates who proposed to execute this imperial monument. But Alexander bade him leave Mount Athos alone. As it was, it might be christened вҖңXerxes, his Folly,вҖқ and, for his part, he preferred to regard Mount Caucasus, and the Himalayas, and the river Don as the symbolic memorials of his acts and deeds.вҒ вҖ”PlutarchвҖҷs <i>Moralia</i>. вҖңDe Alexandri Fortuna et Virtute,вҖқ Orat. II. cap. ii.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-985" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The вҖңPolitical EconomyвҖқ Club was founded in April, 1821. James Mill, Thomas Tooke, and David Ricardo were among the original members, See <i>Political Economy Club</i>, Revised Report, 1876, p. 60.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-986" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Stanzas lxxxviii. and lxxxix. are not in the MS.] <a href="canto-12.xhtml#noteref-987" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 13-->
				<li id="note-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fy. 12<sup>th</sup> 1823. <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-988" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The allusion is to the refrain of CanningвҖҷs verses on Pitt, вҖңThe Pilot that weathered the storm.вҖқ Compare, too, вҖңThe daring pilot in extremityвҖқ (i.e. the Earl of Shaftesbury), who вҖңsought the stormsвҖқ (DrydenвҖҷs <i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>, lines 159вҒ вҖ“вҒ 161).] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-989" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Johnson loved вҖңdear, dear Bathurst,вҖқ because he was вҖңa very good hater.вҖқвҒ вҖ”See BoswellвҖҷs <i>Johnson</i>, 1876, p. 78 (CrokerвҖҷs <i>footnote</i>).] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-990" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[So, too, Charles Kingsley, in <i>Westward Ho!</i> ii. 299, 300, calls <i>Don Quixote</i> вҖңthe saddest of books in spite of all its wit.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Notes and Queries</i>, Second Series, iii. 124.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-991" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>By that great EpicвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-992" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңYour husband is in his old lunes again.вҖқ <i>Merry Wives of Windsor</i>, act iv. sc. 2, lines 16, 17.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-993" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңDavus sum, non Oedipus.вҖқ Terence, <i>Andria,</i> act i. sc. 2, line 23.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-994" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңвҖҠвҖҳT is not in mortals to command success,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But weвҖҷll do more, SemproniusвҒ вҖ”weвҖҷll deserve it.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>AddisonвҖҷs <i>Cato</i>, act i. sc. 2, ed. 1777, ii. 77.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-995" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”вҖңThe colt thatвҖҷs backed and burthened being young.вҖқ <i>Venus and Adonis</i>, lxx. line 5.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-996" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[To вҖңbreak square,вҖқ or вҖңsquares,вҖқ is to interrupt the regular order, as in the proverbial phrase, вҖңIt breaks no squares,вҖқ i.e. does no harmвҒ вҖ”does not matter. Compare Sterne, <i>Tristram Shandy</i> (1802), ii. v. 152, вҖңThis fault in Trim <i>broke no squares</i> with themвҖқ (<i>N. Engl. Dict.</i>, art. вҖңBreak,вҖқ No.В 46). The origin of the phrase is uncertain, but it may, perhaps, refer to military tactics. Shakespeare (<i>Henry V.</i>, act iv. sc. 2, line 28) speaks of вҖңsquares of battle.вҖқ] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-997" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWith every thing that pretty <i>bin,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>My lady sweet, arise.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Cymbeline</i>, act ii. sc. 3, lines, 25, 26.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>[So Warburton and Hanmer. The folio reads вҖңthat pretty is.вҖқ See KnightвҖҷs <i>Shakespeare</i>, Pictorial Edition, <i>Tragedies</i>, i. 203.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-998" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The house which Byron occupied, 1815вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1816, No.В 13, Piccadilly Terrace, was the property of Elizabeth, Duchess of Devonshire.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-999" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The slightest obstacle which may encumber</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The path downhill is something grand.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1000" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Not even in fools who howsoever blind.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1001" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>That anything is new to a Chinese;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And such is EuropeвҖҷs fashionable ease.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1002" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A hidden wine beneath an icy presence.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1003" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Though this we hope has been reserved for this age.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1004" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңFor the creed of Zoroaster,вҖқ see Sir Walter Scott, <i>Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft</i>, 1830, pp. 87, 88. (See, too, <i>Cain</i>, act ii. sc. 2, line 404, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 254, note 2.)] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1005" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңArcades ambo.вҖқ [Virgil, <i>Bucol.</i>, Ecl. vii. 4.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1006" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[So travel the rich.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1007" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖ”the noble host intends.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1008" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңJudicious drank, and greatly-daring dined.вҖқ Pope, <i>Dunciad</i>, iv. 318.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1009" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[ByronвҖҷs description of the place of his inheritance, which was to know him no more, is sketched from memory, but it unites the charm of a picture with the accuracy of a ground-plan. Eight years had gone by since he had looked his last on вҖңvenerable archвҖқ and вҖңlucid lakeвҖқ (see вҖңEpistle to Augusta,вҖқ stanza viii. lines 7, 8), but he had not forgotten, he could not forget, that enchanted and enchanting scene.</p>
					<p>Newstead Abbey or Priory was founded by Henry II., by way of deodand or expiation for the murder of Thomas Becket. Lands which bordered the valley of the Leen, and which had formed part of Sherwood Forest, were assigned for the use and endowment of a chapter of вҖңblack canons regular of the order of St.В Augustine,вҖқ and on a site, by the river-side to the south of the forest uplands (stanza lv. lines 5вҒ вҖ“вҒ 8) the new stede, or place, or station, arose. It was a вҖңNorman AbbeyвҖқ (stanza lv. line 1) which the Black Canons dedicated to Our Lady, and, here and there, in the cloisters, traces of Norman architecture remain, but the enlargement and completion of the monastery was carried out in successive stages and вҖңtransition periods,вҖқ in a style or styles which, perhaps, more by hap than by cunning, Byron rightly named вҖңmixed GothicвҖқ (stanza lv. line 4). To work their mills, and perhaps to drain the marshy valley, the monks dammed the Leen and excavated a chain of lakesвҒ вҖ”the largest to the north-west, ByronвҖҷs вҖңlucid lake;вҖқ a second to the south of the Abbey; and a third, now surrounded with woods, and overlooked by the вҖңwicked lordвҖҷsвҖқ вҖңragged rockвҖқ below the Abbey, half a mile to the south-east. The вҖңcascade,вҖқ which flows over and through a stone-work sluice, and forms a rocky water-fall, issues from the upper lake, and is in full view of the west front of the Abbey. Almost at right angles to these lakes are three ponds: the Forest Pond to the north of the stone wall, which divides the garden from the forest; the square вҖңEagleвҖқ Pond in the MonksвҖҷ Garden; and the narrow stew-pond, bordered on either side with overhanging yews, which drains into the second or Garden Lake. Byron does not enlarge on this double chain of lakes and ponds, and, perhaps for the sake of pictorial unity, converts the second (if a second then existed) and third lakes into a river.</p>
					<p>The Abbey, which, at the dissolution of monasteries in 1539, was handed over by Henry VIII. to Sir John Byron, вҖңsteward and warden of the forest of Shirewood,вҖқ was converted, here and there, more or less, into a baronial вҖңmansionвҖқ (stanza lxvi.). It is, roughly speaking, a square block of buildings, flanking the sides of a grassy quadrangle. Surrounding the quadrangle are two-storied cloisters, and in the centre a вҖңGothic fountainвҖқ (stanza lxv. line 1) of composite workmanship. The upper portion of the stonework is hexagonal, and is ornamented with a double row of gargoyles (all вҖңmonstersвҖқ and no вҖңsaints,вҖқ recalling, perhaps identical with, the вҖңseven deadly sinsвҖқ gargoyles, still <i>in situ</i> in the quadrangle of Magdalen College, Oxford); the lower half, which belongs to the seventeenth or eighteenth century, is hollowed into niches of a Roman or classical design. (In ByronвҖҷs time the fountain stood in a courtyard in front of the Abbey, but before he composed this canto it had been restored by Colonel Wildman to its original place within the quadrangle. Byron was acquainted with the change, and writes accordingly.) When the Byrons took possession of the Abbey the upper stories of the cloisters were converted, on three sides of the quadrangle, into galleries, and on the fourth, the north side, into a library. Abutting on the cloisters are the monastic buildings proper, in part transformed, but with вҖңmuch of the monasticвҖқ preserved. On the west, the front of the Abbey, the ground floor consists of the entrance hall and MonksвҖҷ Parlour, and, above, the GuestsвҖҷ Refectory or Banqueting-hall, and the PriorвҖҷs Parlour. On the south, the Xenodochium or Guesten Hall, and, above, the MonksвҖҷ Refectory, or Grand Drawing-room; on the south and east, on the ground floor, the PriorвҖҷs Lodgings, the Chapter House (вҖңthe exquisite small chapel,вҖқ stanza lxvi. line 5), the вҖңslypeвҖқ or passage between church and Chapter House; and in the upper story, the state bedrooms, named after the kings, Edward III., Henry VII., etc., who, by the terms of the grant of land to the Prior and Canons, were entitled to free quarters in the Abbey. During ByronвҖҷs brief tenure of Newstead, and for long years before, these вҖңhuge halls, long galleries, and spacious chambersвҖқ (stanza lxxvii. line 1) were half dismantled, and in a more or less ruinous condition. A few pictures remained on the walls of the Great Drawing-room, of the PriorвҖҷs Parlour, and in the apartments of the south-east wing or annexe, which dates from the seventeenth century (see the account of a visit to Newstead in 1812, in <i>Beauties of England and Wales</i>, 1813, xii. 401вҒ вҖ“вҒ 405). There are and were portraits, by Lely (stanza lxviii. line 7), of a Lady Byron, of Fanny Jennings, Duchess of Tyrconnel, вҖңloveliness personified,вҖқ of Mrs.В Hughes, and of Nell Gwynne; by Sir Godfrey Kneller, of William and Mary; by unnamed artists, of George I. and George II.; and by Ramsay, of George III. There are portraits of a fat Prior, William Sandall, with a jewelled reliquary; of вҖңSir John the Little with the Great Beard,вҖқ who ruled in the PriorвҖҷs stead; and there is the portrait, a votive tablet of penitence and remorse, вҖңof that Lord Arundel Who struck in heat the child he loved so wellвҖқ (see вҖңA Picture at Newstead,вҖқ by Matthew Arnold, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1890, p. 177); but of portraits of judges or bishops, or of pictures by old masters, there is neither trace nor record.</p>
					<p>But the characteristic feature of Newstead Abbey, so familiar that description seems unnecessary, and, yet, never quite accurately described, is the west front of the Priory Church, which is in line with the west front of the Abbey. вҖңHalf apart,вҖқ the southern portion of this front, which abuts on the windows of the PriorвҖҷs Parlour, and the room above, where Byron slept, flanks and conceals the west end of the north cloisters and library; but, with this exception, it is a screen, and nothing more. In the centre is the вҖңmighty windowвҖқ (stanza lxii. line 1), shorn of glass and tracery; above are six lancet windows (which Byron seems to have regarded as niches), and, above again, in a вҖңhigher nicheвҖқ (stanza lxi. line 1), is the crowned Virgin with the Babe in her arms, which escaped, as by a miracle, the вҖңfiery dartsвҖқвҒ вҖ”the shot and cannon-balls of the Cromwellian troopers. On either side of the central window are вҖңtwo blank windows containing tracery [вҖҳgeometrical decoratedвҖҷ]вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ carved [in relief] on the solid ashlar;вҖқ on either side of the window, and at the northern and southern extremities of the front, are buttresses with canopied niches, in each of which a saint or apostle must once have stood. Over the west door there is the mutilated figure of (?) the Saviour, but of twelve saints or twelve niches there is no trace. The вҖңgrand archвҖқ is an ivy-clad screen, and nothing more. Behind and beyond, in place of vanished nave, of aisle and transept, is the smooth green turf; and at the east end, on the site of the high altar, stands the urn-crowned masonry of BoatswainвҖҷs tomb.</p>
					<p>Newstead Abbey was sold by Lord Byron to his old schoolfellow, Colonel Thomas Wildman, in November, 1817. The house and property were resold in 1861, by his widow, to William Frederick Webb, Esq., a traveller in many lands, the friend and host of David Livingstone. At his death the estate was inherited by his daughter, Miss Geraldine Webb, who was married to General Sir Herbert Charles Chermside, G.C.M.G., etc., Governor of Queensland, in 1899.</p>
					<p>For Newstead Abbey, see <i>Beauties of England and Wales</i>, 1813, xii. Part I. 401вҒ вҖ“вҒ 405 (often reprinted without acknowledgment); <i>Abbotsford and Newstead Abbey</i>, by Washington Irving, 1835; <i>Journal of the Archaeological Association</i> (papers by T.J. Pettigrew, F.R.S., and Arthur Ashpitel, F.S.A.), 1854, vol. ix. pp. 14вҒ вҖ“вҒ 39; and <i>A Souvenir of Newstead Abbey</i> (illustrated by a series of admirable photographs), by Richard Allen, Nottingham, 1874, etc., etc.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1010" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The woodlands were sacrificed to the needs or fancies of ByronвҖҷs great-uncle, the вҖңwicked Lord.вҖқ One splendid oak, known as the вҖңPilgrimвҖҷs Oak,вҖқ which stood and stands near the north lodge of the park, near the вҖңHut,вҖқ was bought in by the neighbouring gentry, and made over to the estate. Perhaps by the Druid oak Byron meant to celebrate this вҖңlast of the clan,вҖқ which, in his day, before the woods were replanted, must have stood out in solitary grandeur.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1011" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare вҖңEpistle to Augusta,вҖқ stanza x. line 1, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 68.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1012" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The little wood which Byron planted at the south-east corner of the upper or вҖңStableвҖқ Lake, known as вҖңPoetвҖҷs Corner,вҖқ still slopes to the waterвҖҷs brink. Nor have the wild-fowl diminished. The lower of the three lakes is specially reserved as a breeding-place.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1013" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Its shriller echoвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1014" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which sympathized with TimeвҖҷs and TempestвҖҷs march,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In gazing on that high and haughty Arch.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1015" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See lines вҖңOn Leaving Newstead Abbey,вҖқ stanza 5, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 3, note 1.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1016" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But in the stillness of the moonвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1017" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Vide ante</i>, <i>The Deformed Transformed</i>, Part I. line 532, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 497.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1018" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not a frolic invention: it is useless to specify the spot, or in what county, but I have heard it both alone and in company with those who will never hear it more. It can, of course, be accounted for by some natural or accidental cause, but it was a strange sound, and unlike any other I have ever heard (and I have heard many above and below the surface of the earth produced in ruins, etc., etc., or caverns).вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</p>
					<p>[вҖңThe unearthly soundвҖқ may still be heard at rare intervals, but it is difficult to believe that the вҖңhuge archвҖқ can act as an ГҶolian harp. Perhaps the smaller lancet windows may vocalize the wind.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1019" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Prouder of such a toy than of their breed.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1020" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Salvator Rosa. The wicked necessity of rhyming obliges me to adapt the name to the verse.вҒ вҖ”[MS.]</p>
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңWhateвҖҷer Lorraine light touchвҖҷd with softening hue,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or <i>savage</i> Rosa dashвҖҷd, or learned Poussin drew.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>ThomsonвҖҷs <i>Castle of Indolence</i>, Canto I. stanza xxxviii. lines 8, 9.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1021" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If I err not, вҖңyour DaneвҖқ is one of IagoвҖҷs catalogue of nations вҖңexquisite in their drinking.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[вҖңYour Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied HollanderвҒ вҖ”drink hoa! are nothing to your English.вҖқ вҖңIs your Englishman so exquisite in his drinking?вҖқ (So Collier and Knight. The Quarto reads вҖңexpertвҖқ).вҒ вҖ”<i>Othello</i>, act ii. sc. 3, lines 71вҒ вҖ“вҒ 74.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1022" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>His bell-mouthed gobletвҒ вҖ”and his laughing group</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Provoke my thirstвҒ вҖ”what ho! a flask of Rhenish.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1023" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Hath yet at night the very best of wines.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1024" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңSea-coalвҖқ (i.e. Newcastle coal), as distinguished from вҖңcharcoalвҖқ and вҖңearth-coal.вҖқ But the qualification must have been unusual and old-fashioned in 1822. вҖңEarth-coalвҖқ is found in large quantities on the Newstead estate, and the Abbey, far below its foundations, is tunnelled by a coal-drift.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1025" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See GrayвҖҷs <i>omitted</i> stanzaвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңвҖҠвҖҳHere scatterвҖҷd oft, <i>the earliest</i> of the year,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">By hands unseen, are showers of violets found;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The red-breast loves to build and warble here,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And little footsteps lightly print the ground.вҖҷ</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>As fineвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ as any in his Elegy. I wonder that he could have the heart to omit it.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңExtracts from a Diary,вҖқ February 27, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 210. The stanza originally preceded the Epitaph.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1026" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Assyria. [See <i>Daniel</i> iii. 1.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1027" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">вёәвҒ she hath the tame</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Preserved within doorsвҒ вҖ”why not make them Game?</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1028" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[It is difficult, if not impossible, to furnish a clue to the names of all the guests at Norman Abbey. Some who are included in this ghostly вҖңhouse-partyвҖқ seem to be, and, perhaps, were meant to be, <i>nomina umbrarum</i>; and others are, undoubtedly, contemporary celebrities, under a more or less transparent disguise. A few of these shadows have been substantiated (<i>vide infra, et post</i>), but the greater part decline to be materialized or verified.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1029" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ the Countess Squabby.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1030" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Perhaps Mary, widow of the eighth Earl of Cork and Orrery: вҖңDowager Cork,вҖқ вҖңOld Corky,вҖқ of Joseph JekyllвҖҷs <i>Correspondence</i>, 1894, pp. 83, 275.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1031" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Mrs.В Rabbi may be Mrs.В Coutts, the Mrs.В Million of <i>Vivian Grey</i> (1826, i. 183), who arrived at вҖңChГўteau Desir in a crimson silk pelisse, hat and feathers, with diamond ear-rings, and a rope of gold round her neck.вҖқ] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1032" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lie, lye, or ley, is a solution of potassium salts obtained by bleaching wood-ashes. Byron seems to have confused вҖңlieвҖқ with вҖңlee,вҖқ i.e. dregs, sediment.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1033" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>вҖңAroint thee, witch!</i> the rump-fed ronyon cries.вҖқ <i>Macbeth</i>, act ii. sc. 3, line 6.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1034" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Or (to come to the point, like my friend Pulci).</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1035" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Epist. Ad Pisones</i>, line 343.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1036" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ by fear or flattery.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1037" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Siria, i.e. bitch-star. <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1038" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I have seenвҒ вҖ”no matter whatвҒ вҖ”we now shall see.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1039" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Parolles [see <i>AllвҖҷs Well that Ends Well</i>, <i>passim</i>] is Brougham (<i>vide ante</i>, the suppressed stanzas, Canto I. <a>pp. 67вҒ вҖ“вҒ 69</a>). It is possible that this stanza was written after the Canto as a whole was finished. But, if not, an incident which took place in the House of Commons, April 17, 1823, during a debate on Catholic Emancipation, may be quoted in corroboration of BroughamвҖҷs unreadiness with regard to the point of honour. In the course of his speech he accused Canning of вҖңmonstrous truckling for the purpose of obtaining office,вҖқ and Canning, without waiting for Brougham to finish, gave him the lie: вҖңI rise to say that that is falseвҖқ (<i>Parl. Deb.</i>, N.S. vol. 8, p. 1091).</p>
					<p>There was a вҖңscene,вҖқ which ended in an exchange of explanations and quasi-apologies, and henceforth, as a rule, parliamentary insults were given and received without recourse to duelling. Byron was not aware that the вҖңold orderвҖқ had passed or was passing. Compare Hazlitt, in <i>The Spirit of the Age</i>, 1825, pp. 302, 303: вҖңHe [Brougham] is adventurous, but easily panic-struck, and sacrifices the vanity of self-opinion to the necessity of self-preservationвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ himself the first to get out of harmвҖҷs way and escape from the danger;вҖқ and Mr.В Parthenopex Puff (W. Stewart Rose), in <i>Vivian Grey</i> (1826, i. 186, 187), вҖңOh! heвҖҷs a prodigious fellow! What do you think Booby says? he says, that Foaming Fudge [Brougham] can do more than any man in Great Britain; that he had one day to plead in the KingвҖҷs Bench, spout at a tavern, speak in the House, and fight a duelвҒ вҖ”and that he found time for everything but the <i>last</i>.вҖқ] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1040" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>There was, too, Henry BвҒ вёә.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1041" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[In his Journal for December 5, 1813, Byron writes: вҖңThe Duke of вёә called.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ His Grace is a good, noble, ducal personвҖқ (<i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 361). Possibly the earlier вҖңDuke of DashвҖқ was William Spencer, sixth Duke of Devonshire, an old schoolfellow of ByronвҖҷs, who was eager to renew the acquaintance (<i>Letters</i>, 1899, iii. 98, note 2); and, if so, he may be reckoned as one of the guests of вҖңNorman Abbey.вҖқ] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1042" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Gronow (<i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, i. 234вҒ вҖ“вҒ 240) identifies the <i>Chevalier de la Ruse</i> with Casimir Comte de Montrond (1768вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1843), back-stairs diplomatist, wit, gambler, and man of fashion. He was the lifelong companion, if not friend, of Talleyrand, who pleaded for him: вҖңQui est-ce qui ne lвҖҷaimerait pas, il est si vicieux!вҖқ At one time in the pay of Napoleon, he fell under his displeasure, and, to avoid arrest, spent two years of exile (1812вҒ вҖ“вҒ 14) in England. вҖңHe was not,вҖқ says Gronow, вҖңa great talker, nor did he swaggerвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ or laugh at his own <i>bons-mots</i>. He was demure, sleek, sly, and dangerous.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ In the London clubs he went by the name of Old French.вҖқ He was a constant guest of the Duke of YorkвҖҷs at Oatlands, вҖңand won much at his whist-tableвҖқ (<i>English Whist</i>, by W.P. Courtney, 1894, p. 181). For his second residence in England, and for a sketch by DвҖҷOrsay, see <i>A Portion of the Journal, etc.</i>, by Thomas Raikes, 1857, frontispiece to vol. iv., <i>et</i> vols. i.-iv. <i>passim</i>. See, for biographical notice, <i>LвҖҷAmi de M. de Talleyrand</i>, par Henri Welschinger, <i>La Revue de Paris</i>, 1895, Fev., tom. i. pp. 640вҒ вҖ“вҒ 654.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1043" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Perhaps Sir James MackintoshвҒ вҖ”a frequent guest at Holland House.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1044" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Possibly Colonel (afterwards Sir James) Macdonell [d. 1857], вҖңa man of colossal stature,вҖқ who occupied and defended the ChГўteau of Hougoumont on the night before the battle of Waterloo. (See Gronow, <i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, i. 76, 77.)] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1045" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sir George Prevost (1767вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1816), the Governor-General of British North America, and nominally Commander-in-chief of the Army in the second American War, contributed, by his excess of caution, supineness, and delay, to the humiliation of the British forces. The particular allusion is to his alleged inaction at a critical moment in the engagement of September 11, 1814, between Commodore Macdonough and Captain Downie in Plattsburg Bay. вҖңA letter was sent to Capt.В Downie, strongly urging him to come on, as the army had long been waiting for his co-operation.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The brave Downie replied that he required no urging to do his duty.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He was as good as his word. The guns were scaled when he got under way, upon hearing which Sir George issued an <i>order</i> for the troops to <i>cook</i>, instead of <i>that of instant co-operation</i>.вҖқвҒ вҖ”To Editor of the <i>Montreal Herald</i>, May 23, 1815, <i>Letters of Veritas</i>, 1815, pp. 116, 117. See, too, <i>The Quarterly Review</i>, July, 1822, vol. xxvii. p. 446.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1046" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[George Hardinge (1744вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1816), who was returned M.P. for Old Sarum in 1784, was appointed, in 1787, Senior Justice of the Counties of Brecon, Glamorgan, and Radnor. According to the <i>GentlemanвҖҷs Magazine</i>, 1816 (vol. lxxxvi. p. 563), вҖңIn conversation he had few equals.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ He delighted in pleasantries, and always afforded to his auditors abundance of mirth and entertainment as well as information.вҖқ Byron seems to have supposed that these вҖңpleasantriesвҖқ found their way into his addresses to condemned prisoners, but if the charges printed in his <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, edited by John Nichols in 1818, are reported in full, he was entirely mistaken. They are tedious, but the вҖңwaggeryвҖқ is conspicuous by its absence.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1047" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With all his laurels growing upon one tree.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1048" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[John Philpot Curran (1750вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1817). вҖңDid you know Curran?вҖқ asked Byron of Lady Blessington (<i>Conversations</i>, 1834, p. 176); вҖңhe was the most wonderful person I ever saw. In him was combined an imagination the most brilliant and profound, with a flexibility and wit that would have justified the observation applied toвҒ вҖ”вҒ that his heart was in his head.вҖқ (See, too, <i>Detached Thoughts</i>, No.В 24, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 421.)] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1049" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For Thomas Lord Erskine (1750вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1823), see <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 390, note 5. See, too, <i>Detached Thoughts</i>, No.В 93, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 455, 456. In his <i>Spirit of the Age</i>, 1825, pp. 297, 298, Hazlitt contrasts вҖңthe impassioned appeals and flashes of wit of a CurranвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the golden tide of wisdom, eloquence, and fancy of a Burke,вҖқ with the вҖңdashing and graceful mannerвҖқ which concealed the poverty and вҖңdeadnessвҖқ of the matter of ErskineвҖҷs speeches.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1050" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i4">вёәвҒ all classes mostly pull</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At the same oarвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1051" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңMrs.В Adams answered Mr.В Adams, that it was blasphemous to talk of Scripture out of church.вҖқ This dogma was broached to her husbandвҒ вҖ”the best Christian in any book.вҒ вҖ”See <i>The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews</i>, Bk. IV. chap. xi. ed. 1876, p. 324.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1052" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ in the ripe age.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1053" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Probably Richard Sharp (1759вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1835), known as вҖңConversation Sharp.вҖқ Byron frequently met him in society in 1813вҒ вҖ“вҒ 14, and in вҖңExtracts from a Diary,вҖқ January 9, 1821, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, v. 161, describes him as вҖңthe Conversationist.вҖқ He visited Byron at the Villa Diodati in the autumn of 1816 (<i>Life</i>, p. 323).] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1054" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act i. sc. 5, line 22.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1055" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Nor bate (read bait)вҒ вёә.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1056" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See letters to the Earl of Blessington, April 5, 1823, <i>Letters</i>, 1891, vi. 187.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1057" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But full of wisdomвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A sort of rose entwining with a thistle.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1058" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Iliad</i>, x. 341, sq.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1059" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It would have taught him humanity at least. This sentimental savage, whom it is a mode to quote (amongst the novelists) to show their sympathy for innocent sports and old songs, teaches how to sew up frogs, and break their legs by way of experiment, in addition to the art of anglingвҒ вҖ”the cruelest, the coldest, and the stupidest of pretended sports. They may talk about the beauties of nature, but the angler merely thinks of his dish of fish; he has no leisure to take his eyes from off the streams, and a single <i>bite</i> is worth to him more than all the scenery around. Besides, some fish bite best on a rainy day. The whale, the shark, and the tunny fishery have somewhat of noble and perilous in them; even net fishing, trawling, etc., are more humane and useful. But angling!вҒ вҖ”no angler can be a good man.</p>
					<p>вҖңOne of the best men I ever knewвҒ вҖ”as humane, delicate-minded, generous, and excellent a creature as any in the worldвҒ вҖ”was an angler: true, he angled with painted flies, and would have been incapable of the extravagancies of I. Walton.вҖқ</p>
					<p>The above addition was made by a friend in reading over the MS.вҒ вҖ”вҖңAudi alteram partem.вҖқвҒ вҖ”I leave it to counter-balance my own observation. <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1060" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Fy. 19<sup>th</sup> 1823.вҒ вҖ”[MS.] <a href="canto-13.xhtml#noteref-1061" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 14-->
				<li id="note-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fry. 23, 1814 (<i>sic</i>).вҒ вҖ”[MS.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1062" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[CompareвҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңOur little systems have their day;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">They have their day and cease to be.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>TennysonвҖҷs <i>In Memoriam</i>.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1063" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[With this open mind with regard to the future, compare Charles KingsleyвҖҷs вҖңreverent curiosityвҖқ (<i>Letters and Memoirs, etc.</i>, 1883, p. 349).] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1064" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңWe usually try which way the wind bloweth, by casting up grass or chaff, or such light things into the air.вҖқвҒ вҖ”BaconвҖҷs <i>Natural History</i>, No.В 820, <i>Works</i>, 1740, iii. 168.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1065" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe World was all before them.вҖқ <i>Paradise Lost</i>, bk. xii. line 646.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1066" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңBut why then publish?вҒ вҖ”Granville, the polite,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And knowing Walsh, would tell me I could write.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Pope, <i>Prologue to Satires</i>, lines 135, 136.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1067" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Virg., <i>Aen.</i>, ii. 91 вҖң(Haud ignota);вҖқ et <i>ibid.</i>, line 6.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1068" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Hor., <i>Od.</i> iii. 2. 26.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1069" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And though by no means overpowered with riches,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Would gladly place beneath it my last rag of breeches.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1070" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Craning</i>.вҒ вҖ”вҖңTo <i>crane</i>вҖқ is, or was, an expression used to denote a gentlemanвҖҷs stretching out his neck over a hedge, вҖңto look before he leaped;вҖқвҒ вҖ”a pause in his вҖңvaulting ambition,вҖқ which in the field doth occasion some delay and execration in those who may be immediately behind the equestrian sceptic. вҖңSir, if you donвҖҷt choose to take the leap, let me!вҖқвҒ вҖ”was a phrase which generally sent the aspirant on again; and to good purpose: for though вҖңthe horse and riderвҖқ might fall, they made a gap through which, and over him and his steed, the field might follow. <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1071" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The sulky Huntsman grimly said вҖңThe Frenchman</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was almost worthy to become his henchman.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1072" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And what notвҒ вҖ”though he had ridden like a Centaur</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When called next day declined the same adventure.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1073" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Mr.В W. Ernst, in his <i>Memoirs of the Life of Lord Chesterfield</i>, 1893 (p. 425, note 2), quotes these lines in connection with a comparison between French and English sport, contained in a letter from Lord Chesterfield to his son, dated June 30, 1751: вҖңThe French manner of hunting is gentlemanlike; ours is only for bumpkins and boobies.вҖқ Elsewhere, however (<i>The World</i>, No.В 92, October 3, 1754), commenting on a remark of PascalвҖҷs, he admits вҖңthat the jolly sportsmanвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ improves his health, at least, by his exercise.вҖқ] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1074" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ as she skimmвҖҷd along,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her flying feet unbathвҖҷd on billows hung.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>DrydenвҖҷs <i>Virgil</i> (<i>Aen.</i>, vii. 1101, 1102).]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1075" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 492, note 1.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1076" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[GuidoвҖҷs fresco of the Aurora, вҖңscattering flowers before the chariot of the sunвҖқ is on a ceiling of the Casino in the Palazzo Rospigliosi, in Rome.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1077" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron described Count Alfred DвҖҷOrsay as having вҖңall the airs of a <i>Cupidon dГ©chaГ®nГ©</i>.вҖқ See letters to Moore and the Earl of Blessington, April 2, 1823, <i>Letters</i>, 1901, vi. 180, 185.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1078" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In SwiftвҖҷs or Horace WalpoleвҖҷs letters I think it is mentioned that somebody, regretting the loss of a friend, was answered by an universal Pylades: вҖңWhen I lose one, I go to the Saint JamesвҖҷs Coffee-house, and take another.вҖқ I recollect having heard an anecdote of the same kind.вҒ вҖ”Sir W.D. was a great gamester. Coming in one day to the Club of which he was a member, he was observed to look melancholy.вҒ вҖ”вҖңWhat is the matter, Sir William?вҖқ cried Hare, of facetious memory.вҒ вҖ”вҖңAh!вҖқ replied Sir W., вҖңI have just lost poor Lady D.вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңLost! What at? Quinze or Hazard?вҖқ was the consolatory rejoinder of the querist.</p>
					<p>[The <i>dramatis personae</i> are probably Sir William Drummond (1770вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1828), author of the <i>Academical Questions, etc.</i>, and Francis Hare, the wit, known as the вҖңвҖҠвҖҳSilent Hare,вҖҷ from his extreme loquacity.вҖқвҒ вҖ”GronowвҖҷs <i>Reminiscences</i>, 1889, ii. 98вҒ вҖ“вҒ 101.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1079" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>They own that you are fairly dished at last.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1080" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The famous Chancellor [Axel Oxenstiern (1583вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1654)] said to his son, on the latter expressing his surprise upon the great effects arising from petty causes in the presumed mystery of politics: вҖңYou see by this, my son, with how little wisdom the kingdoms of the world are governed.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[The story is that his son John, who had been sent to represent him at the Congress of Westphalia, 1648, wrote home to complain that the task was beyond him, and that he could not cope with the difficulties which he was encountering, and that the Chancellor replied, вҖңNescis, mi fili, quantillГў prudentiГў homines regantur.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Biographie Universelle</i>, art. вҖңOxenstierna.вҖқ] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1081" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Who are our sureties that our moral pure is.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1082" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And not to encourage whispering in the house.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1083" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Once upon a time, Tiresias, who was shepherding on Mount Cyllene, wantonly stamped with his heel on a pair of snakes, and was straightway turned into a woman. Seven years later he was led to treat another pair of snakes in like fashion, and, happily or otherwise, was turned back into a man. Hence, when Jupiter and Juno fell to wrangling on the comparative enjoyments of men and women, the question was referred to Tiresias, as a person of unusual experience and authority. He gave it in favour of the woman, and Juno, who was displeased at his answer, struck him with blindness. But Jupiter, to make amends, gave him the вҖңliberty of prophesyingвҖқ for seven, some say nine, generations. (See Ovid, <i>Metam.</i>, iii. 320; and Thomas MunckerвҖҷs notes on the <i>Fabulae</i> of Hyginus, No. lxxv. ed. 1681, pp. 126вҒ вҖ“вҒ 128.)] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1084" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Midsummer NightвҖҷs Dream</i>, act ii. sc. i, line 168.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1085" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>La Nouvelle HГ©loГҜse</i>. <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1086" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hor., <i>Epod.</i>, II. line 1. <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1087" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The Latin proverb, <i>Noscitur ex sociis</i>, is not an Horatian maxim.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1088" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I, therefore, deal in generalsвҒ вҖ”which is wise.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1089" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See SheridanвҖҷs <i>Critic</i> (вҖңTilburinaвҖқ <i>loq.</i>), act iii. <i>s.f.</i>] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1090" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңthe coxcomb CzarвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the somewhat agГ©d youth,вҖқ see <i>The Age of Bronze</i>, lines 434вҒ вҖ“вҒ 483, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 563, note 1.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1091" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Sardanapalus</i>, act i. sc. 2, line 1, <i>ibid.</i>, p. 15, note 1.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1092" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto III. stanza lxxi. line 3, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 261, 300, note 17.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1093" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Or GermanyвҒ вҖ”she knew nought of all this</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Impracticable, novel-reading trance.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1094" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Even thereвҒ вҖ”as in relationship will hold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And make the feeling of a finer mood.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1095" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThese violent delights have violent ends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And in their triumph die.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, act ii. sc. 6, lines 9, 10.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1096" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Alas! I quote experienceвҒ вҖ”seldom yet</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">I had a paramourвҒ вҖ”and IвҖҷve had manyвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom I had not some reason to regretвҒ вҖ”</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">For whom I did not make myself a Zany.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1097" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I also had a wifeвҒ вҖ”not to forget</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The marriage stateвҒ вҖ”the best or worst of any,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who was the very paragon of wives</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet mad the misery of <span class="variant">many<br/>
							both our<br/>
							several</span> lives.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1098" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Lady Holland, Lady Jersey, Madame de StaГ«l, and before and above all, his sister, Mrs.В Leigh.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1099" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I also had some female <i>friends</i>вҒ вҖ”by GвҒ вҖ”d!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Or if the oath seem strongвҒ вҖ”I swear by Jove!</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1100" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Who stuck to meвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1101" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron must have been among the first to naturalize the French <i>milliard</i> (a thousand millions), which was used by Voltaire.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1102" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Othello</i>, act i. sc. 3, line 140.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1103" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. March 4<sup>th</sup> 1823.вҒ вҖ”[MS.] <a href="canto-14.xhtml#noteref-1104" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 15-->
				<li id="note-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[It is impossible to persuade the metaphor to march вҖңon all-fours,вҖқ but, to drag it home, by a kind of вҖңfrogвҖҷs march,вҖқ the unfulfilled wants of the soul, the вҖңlurking thoughtsвҖқ are as it were bubbles, which we would fain вҖңbreak on the invisible OceanвҖқ of Passion or Emotion the begetter of bubblesвҒ вҖ”Passion which, like the visible Ocean, images Eternity and portrays, but not to the sensual eye, the beatific vision of the things which are not seen, and, even so, вҖңministers to the SoulвҖҷs delightвҖқ! But вҖңwho can tellвҖқ?] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1105" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>While all withoutвҖҷs indicative of rest.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1106" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A thing on which dull Time should never print age,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">For whom stern Nature should forego her debt.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1107" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Ransom and Morland were ByronвҖҷs bankers. Douglas Kinnaird was a partner in the firm. (See <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 85, note 2.)] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1108" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Old Skeleton with ages for your booty.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1109" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңHe turned himself into all manner of forms with more ease than the chameleon changes his colour.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Thus at Sparta he was all for exercise, frugal in his diet, and severe in his manners. In Asia he was as much for mirth and pleasure, luxury and ease.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Plutarch, <i>Alcibiades</i>, LanghorneвҖҷs translation, 1838, p. 150.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1110" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For the phrase вҖңCupidon DГ©chaГ®nГ©,вҖқ applied to Count DвҖҷOrsay, <i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 526, note 4</a>.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1111" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Plautus, <i>Truculentus</i>, act ii. sc. 8, line 14.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1112" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[RaphaelвҖҷs вҖңTransfigurationвҖқ is in the Vatican.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1113" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As it is necessary in these times to avoid ambiguity, I say that I mean, by вҖңDiviner still,вҖқ <span class="smcap">Christ</span>. If ever God was manвҒ вҖ”or man GodвҒ вҖ”he was <i>both</i>. I never arraigned his creed, but the useвҒ вҖ”or abuse made of it. Mr.В Canning one day quoted Christianity to sanction negro slavery, and Mr.В Wilberforce had little to say in reply. And was Christ crucified, that black men might be scourged? If so, He had better been born a Mulatto, to give both colours an equal chance of freedom, or at least salvation.</p>
					<p>[In a debate in the House of Commons, May 15, 1823 (<i>Parl. Deb.</i>, N.S. vol. ix. pp. 278, 279), Canning, replying to Fowell BuxtonвҖҷs motion for the Abolition of Slavery, said, вҖңGod forbid that I should contend that the Christian religion is favourable to slaveryвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ but if it be meant that in the Christian religion there is a special denunciation against slavery, that slavery and Christianity cannot exist togetherвҒ вҖ”I think that the honourable gentleman himself must admit that the proposition is historically false.вҖқ] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1114" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">вёәвҒ and One Name Greater still</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose lot it was to be the most mistaken.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1115" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To leave the world by bigot fashions shaken.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1116" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which never flatters either Whig or Tory.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1117" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Martial, <i>Epig.</i>, x. 46.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1118" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңFeebleвҖқ for вҖңfoibleвҖқ is found in the writings of Mrs.В Behn and Sir R. LвҖҷEstrange (<i>N. Engl. Dict.</i>).] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1119" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But now I canвҖҷt tell when it will be done.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1120" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The <i>N. Engl. Dict.</i> quotes W. HooperвҖҷs <i>Rational Recreations</i> (1794) as an earlier authority for the use of вҖңconcisionвҖқ in the sense of conciseness.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1121" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Who now are welteringвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1122" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe cat will mew and dog will have his day.вҖқ <i>Hamlet</i>, act v. sc. 1, line 280.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1123" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>I should not be the foremost to deride</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Their faultвҒ вҖ”but quickly take a sword the other way,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And wax an Ultra-royalist, where Royalty</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had nothing left it but a desperate Loyalty.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1124" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңAnd hold no sin so deeply red</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">As that of breaking PriscianвҖҷs head.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>ButlerвҖҷs <i>Hudibras</i>, Part II. Canto II. lines 223, 224.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1125" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Brougham, in the famous critique of <i>Hours of Idleness</i> (<i>Edinburgh Review</i>, January, 1808, vol. xi. pp. 285вҒ вҖ“вҒ 289), was pleased вҖңto counsel him that he do forthwith abandon poetry and turn his talents, which are considerable, and his opportunities, which are great, to better account.вҖқ Others, however, gave him encouragement. See, for instance, a review by J.H. Markland, who afterwards made his name as editor of the Roxburgh Club issue of the Chester Mysteries (whence, perhaps, Byron derived his knowledge of вҖңMysteries and MoralitiesвҖқ), which concludes thus: вҖңHeartily hoping that the вҖҳillness and depression of spirits,вҖҷ which evidently pervade the greater part of these effusions, are entirely dispelled; confident that вҖҳGeorge Gordon, Lord ByronвҖҷ will have a conspicuous niche in the future editions of вҖҳRoyal and Noble Authors,вҖҷ etc.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Gent. Mag.</i>, 1807, vol. lxxvii. p. 1217.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1126" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To marshal onwards to the Delphian Height.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1127" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThree small vessels were apparently all that Columbus had requested. Two of them were light barques, called caravels, not superior to river and coasting craft of more modern days.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ That such long and perilous expeditions into unknown seas, should be undertaken in vessels without decks, and that they should live through the violent tempests by which they were frequently assailed, remain among the singular circumstances of those daring voyages.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus</i>, by Washington Irving, 1831, i. 78.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1128" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>As Women seldom think by halvesвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1129" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This extraordinary and flourishing German colony in America does not entirely exclude matrimony, as the вҖңShakersвҖқ do; but lays such restrictions upon it as prevents more than a certain quantum of births within a certain number of years; which births (as Mr.В Hulme [perhaps Thomas Hulme, whose <i>Journal</i> is quoted in <i>Hints to Emigrants</i>, 1817, pp. 5вҒ вҖ“вҒ 18] observes) generally arrive вҖңin a little flock like those of a farmerвҖҷs lambs, all within the same month perhaps.вҖқ These Harmonists (so called from the name of their settlement) are represented as a remarkably flourishing, pious, and quiet people. See the various recent writers on America.</p>
					<p>[The Harmonists were emigrants from WГјrtemburg, who settled (1803вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1805) under the auspices of George Rapp, in a township 120 miles north of Philadelphia. This they sold, and вҖңtrekkedвҖқ westwards to Indiana. One of their customs was to keep watch by nights and to cry the hours to this tune: вҖңAgain a day is past and a step made nearer to our end. Our time runs away, and the joys of Heaven are our reward.вҖқ (See <i>The Philanthropist</i>, No. xx., 1815, vol. v, pp. 277вҒ вҖ“вҒ 288.)] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1130" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Which test I leave unto the Lords spiritual.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1131" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jacob Tonson, according to Mr.В Pope, was accustomed to call his writers вҖңable pens,вҖқ вҖңpersons of honour,вҖқ and, especially, вҖңeminent hands.вҖқ <i>Vide</i> Correspondence, etc., etc.</p>
					<p>[вҖңPerhaps I should myself be much better pleased, if I were told you called me your little friend, than if you complimented me with the title of a вҖҳgreat genius,вҖҷ or an eminent hand, as Jacob does all his authors.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Pope to Steele</i>, November 29, 1712, <i>Works of Alexander Pope</i>, 1871, vi. 396.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1132" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See DвҖҷIsraeliвҖҷs <i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, 1841, pp. 450вҒ вҖ“вҒ 452, and the Dissertation prefixed to Francis DouceвҖҷs edition of HolbeinвҖҷs <i>Dance of Death</i>, 1858, pp. 1вҒ вҖ“вҒ 218.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1133" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вёәвҒ Miss Allman and Miss Noman.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1134" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i3">вёәвҒ that smooth placid sea</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which did not show and yet concealed a storm.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1135" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>Childe Harold</i>, Canto IV. stanza lix. line 3, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1899, ii. 374, note 2.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1136" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i3">[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And, under him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My Genius is rebuked; as it is said</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mark AntonyвҖҷs was by CГҰsar.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii, sc. 1, lines 54вҒ вҖ“вҒ 56.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1137" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Warison</i>вҒ вҖ”cri-de-guerreвҒ вҖ”note of assault:вҒ вҖ”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңEither receive within these towers</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Two hundred of my masterвҖҷs powers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or straight they sound their <i>warrison,</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span>And storm and spoil this garrison.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Lay of the Last Minstrel</i>, Canto IV. stanza xxiv, lines 17вҒ вҖ“вҒ 20.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1138" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>And adds a third to what was late a pair.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1139" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>вҖңLifeвҖҷs a jest, and all things show it;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I thought so once, and <i>now I know it</i>.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>GayвҖҷs Epitaph.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1140" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңPotage Г  la bonne femme,вҖқ вҖңDindon Г  la PГ©rigueux,вҖқ вҖңSoupe Г  la Beauveau,вҖқ вҖңLe dorey garni dвҖҷГ©perlans frits,вҖқ вҖңLe cuisseau de pore Г  demi sel, garni de choux,вҖқ вҖңLe salmi de perdreaux Г  lвҖҷEspagnole,вҖқ вҖңLes bГ©casses,вҖқ see вҖңBill of Fare for November,вҖқ <i>The French Cook</i>, by Louis Eustache Ude, 1813, p. viii. For вҖңLes poulardes Г  la CondГ©,вҖқ вҖңLe jambon de Westphalie Г  lвҖҷEspagnole,вҖқ вҖңLes petites timballes dвҖҷun salpicon Г  la MonglasвҖқ (?Montglat), вҖңLes filets de perdreaux sautГ©s Г  la Lucullus,вҖқ <i>vide ibid.</i>, p. ix., and for вҖңPetits puits dвҖҷamour garnis de confitures,вҖқ <i>vide</i> Plate of Second Course (to face) p. vi.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1141" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Alexander the Great.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1142" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A dish вҖңГ  la Lucullus.вҖқ This hero, who conquered the East, has left his more extended celebrity to the transplantation of cherries (which he first brought into Europe), and the nomenclature of some very good dishes;вҒ вҖ”and I am not sure that (barring indigestion) he has not done more service to mankind by his cookery than by his conquests. A cherry tree may weigh against a bloody laurel; besides, he has contrived to earn celebrity from both.</p>
					<p>[According to Pliny (<i>Nat, Hist.</i>, lib. xv. cap. xxv. ed. 1593, ii. 131), there were no cherry trees in Italy until L. Lucullus brought them home with him from Pontus after the Mithridatic War (B.C. 74), and it was not for another hundred and twenty years that the cherry tree crossed the Channel and was introduced into Britain.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1143" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңPetits puits dвҖҷamour garnis de confitures,вҖқвҒ вҖ”a classical and well-known dish for part of the flank of a second course [<i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 562</a>]. <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1144" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңTo-day in a palace, to-morrow in a cow-houseвҒ вҖ”this day with a Pacha, the next with a shepherd.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Letter to his mother, July 30, 1810, <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. 295.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1145" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>No lady but a dishвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1146" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThis construction (вҖҳcommenceвҖҷ with the infinitive) has been objected to by stylists,вҖқ says the <i>New English Dictionary</i> (see art. вҖңCommenceвҖқ). Its use is sanctioned by the authority of Pope, Landor, Helps, and Lytton; but even so, it is questionable, if not objectionable.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1147" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Lord! she was so sagely innocent.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1148" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Subauditur вҖң<i>non</i>;вҖқ omitted for the sake of euphony. <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1149" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[John Scott, Earl of Eldon, Lord Chancellor, 1801 to 1827, sat as judge (November 7, 1822) to hear the petition of Henry Wallop Fellowes, that a commission of inquiry should be issued to ascertain whether his uncle, Lord Portsmouth (who married Mary Anne Hanson, the daughter of ByronвҖҷs solicitor), was of sound mind, вҖңand capable of managing his own person and property.вҖқ The Chancellor gave judgment that a commission be issued, and the jury, February, 1823, returned a verdict that Lord Portsmouth had been a lunatic since 1809. (See <i>Letters</i>, 1898, ii. 393, note 3, <i>et ibid.</i>, 1901, vi. 170, note i.)] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1150" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hecla is a famous hot-spring in Iceland. [Byron seems to mistake the volcano for the Geysers.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1151" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. 2, line 367.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1152" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңBy the apostle Paul, shadows to-night</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Richard III.</i>, act v. sc. 3, lines 216вҒ вҖ“вҒ 218.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1153" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hobbes: who, doubting of his own soul, paid that compliment to the souls of other people as to decline their visits, of which he had some apprehension.</p>
					<p>[Bayle (see art. вҖңHobbesвҖқ [<i>Dict. Crit. and Hist.</i>, 1736, iii. 471, note N.]) quotes from <i>Vita Hobb.</i>, p. 106: вҖңHe was as falsely accused by some of being unwilling to be alone, because he was afraid of spectres and apparitions, vain bugbears of fools, which he had chased away by the light of his Philosophy,вҖқ and proceeds to argue that, perhaps, after all, Hobbes was afraid of the dark. вҖңHe was timorous to the last degree, and consequently he had reason to distrust his imagination when he was alone in a chamber in the night; for in spite of him the memory of what he had read and heard concerning apparitions would revive, though he was not persuaded of the reality of these things.вҖқ See, however, for his own testimony that he was вҖңnot afrayd of sprights,вҖқ <i>Letters and Lives of Eminent Persons</i>, by John Aubrey, 1813, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 624.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1154" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act iv. sc. 5, lines 41, 42.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1155" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>End of Canto 15<sup>th</sup>. M<sup>ch</sup>. 25, 1823. B.вҒ вҖ”[MS.] <a href="canto-15.xhtml#noteref-1156" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 16-->
				<li id="note-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>March 29, 1823. <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1157" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Herodotus, <i>Hist.</i>, i. 136.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1158" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Hamlet</i>, act ii. sc. 2, line 103.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1159" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The story is told of St.В Thomas Aquinas, that he wrote a work <i>De Omnibus Rebus</i>, which was followed by a second treatise, <i>De Quibusdam Aliis.</i>] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1160" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Not St.В Augustine, but Tertullian. See his treatise, <i>De Carne Christi</i>, cap. V. c. (<i>Opera</i>, 1744, p. 310): вҖңCrucifixus est Dei filius: non pudet, quia pudendum est: et mortuus est Dei filius: prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est: et sepultus resurrexit: certum est quia impossibile est.вҖқ] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1161" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThat the dead are seen no more,вҖқ said Imlac, вҖңI will not undertake to maintain, against the concurrent and unvaried testimony of all ages, and of all nations. There is no people, rude or unlearned, among whom apparitions of the dead are not related and believed. This opinion, which perhaps prevails as far as human nature is diffused, could become universal only by its truth; those that never heard of one another would not have agreed in a tale which nothing but experience can make credible. That it is doubted by single cavillers, can very little weaken the general evidence; and some, who deny it with their tongues, confess it with their fears.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Rasselas</i>, chap. xxx., <i>Works</i>, ed. 1806, iii. 372, 373.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1162" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The composition of the old Tyrian purple, whether from a shell-fish, or from cochineal, or from kermes, is still an article of dispute; and even its colourвҒ вҖ”some say purple, others scarlet: I say nothing.</p>
					<p>[Kermes is cochineal, the Greek <span title="ko/kkinon">ОәПҢОәОәО№ОҪОҝОҪ</span>. The shell-fish (<i>murex</i>) is the <i>Purpura patula</i>. Both substances were used as dyes.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1163" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See Ovid, <i>Heroid</i>, Epist. ix. line 161.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1164" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Titus used to promise to вҖңbear in mind,вҖқ вҖңto keep on his list,вҖқ the petitions of all his supplicants, and once, at dinner-time, his conscience smote him, that he had let a day go by without a single grant, or pardon, or promotion. Hence his confession. вҖңAmici, diem perdidi!вҖқ <i>Vide</i> Suetonius, <i>De XII. CГҰs.</i>, вҖңTitus,вҖқ lib. viii. cap. 8.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1165" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Tuism</i> is not in JohnsonвҖҷs <i>Dictionary</i>. Coleridge has a note dated 1800 (<i>Literary Remains</i>, i. 292), on вҖңegotizing in <i>tuism</i>вҖқ but it was not included in SoutheyвҖҷs <i>Omniana</i> of 1812, and must have been unknown to Byron.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1166" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Sc. <i>toilette</i>, a Gallicism.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1167" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron loved to make fact and fancy walk together, but, here, his memory played him false, or his art kept him true. The Black Friar walked and walks in the GuestsвҖҷ Refectory (or Banqueting Hall, or вҖңGalleryвҖқ of this stanza), which adjoins the PriorвҖҷs Parlour, but the room where Byron slept (in a four-post bedвҒ вҖ”a coronet, at each corner, atop) is on the floor above the PriorвҖҷs Parlour, and can only be approached by a spiral staircase. Both rooms look west, and command a view of the вҖңlakeвҖҷs billowвҖқ and the вҖңcascade.вҖқ Moreover, the GuestsвҖҷ Refectory was never hung with вҖңold pictures.вҖқ It would seem that Don Juan (perhaps Byron on an emergency) slept in the PriorвҖҷs Parlour, and that in the visionary Newstead the pictures forsook the Grand Drawing-Room for the Hall. Hence the scene! <i>El Libertado</i> steps out of the Gothic Chamber вҖңforthвҖқ into the вҖңgallery,вҖқ and lo! вҖңa monk in cowl and beads.вҖқ But, <i>Quien sabe?</i> The PsalmistвҖҷs caution with regard to princes is not inapplicable to poets.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1168" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare MarinerвҖҷs description of the cave in Hoonga Island (<i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 629, note 1).] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1169" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңThe place,вҖқ wrote Byron to Moore, August 13, 1814, вҖңis worth seeing as a ruin, and I can assure you there <i>was</i> some fun there, even in my time; but that is past. The ghosts, however, and the Gothics, and the waters, and the desolation, make it very lively still.вҖқ вҖңIt was,вҖқ comments Moore (<i>Life</i>, p. 262, note 1), вҖңif I mistake not, during his recent visit to Newstead, that he himself actually fancied he saw the ghost of the Black Friar, which was supposed to have haunted the Abbey from the time of the dissolution of the monasteries, and which he thus describes from the recollection, perhaps, of his own fantasy, in <i>Don Juan</i>.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It is said that the Newstead ghost appeared, also, to Lord ByronвҖҷs cousin, Miss Fanny Parkins, and that she made a sketch of him from memory.вҖқ The legend of the Black Friar may, it is believed at Newstead (<i>et vide post</i>, <a>вҖңSong,вҖқ stanza ii</a>. line 5, p. 583), be traced to the alarm and suspicion of the country-folk, who, on visiting the Abbey, would now and then catch sight of an aged lay-brother, or monkish domestic, who had been retained in the service of the Byrons long after the Canons had been вҖңturned adrift.вҖқ He would naturally keep out of sight of a generation who knew not monks, and, when surprised in the cloisters or ruins of the church, would glide back to his own quarters in the dormitories.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1170" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңShew his eyes, and grieve his heart;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Come like shadows, so depart.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. 1, lines 110, 111.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1171" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>With that she rose as graceful as a Roe</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Slips from the mountain in the month of June,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And opening her Piano вҖҳgan to play</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">ForthwithвҒ вҖ”вҖңIt was a Friar of Orders Gray.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1172" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>By their bed of death he receives their [breath].</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1173" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I think that it was a carpet on which Diogenes trod, withвҒ вҖ”вҖңThus I trample on the pride of Plato!вҖқвҒ вҖ”вҖңWith greater pride,вҖқ as the other replied. But as carpets are meant to be trodden upon, my memory probably misgives me, and it might be a robe, or tapestry, or a table-cloth, or some other expensive and uncynical piece of furniture.</p>
					<p>[It was PlatoвҖҷs couch or lounge which Diogenes stamped upon. вҖңSo much for PlatoвҖҷs pride!вҖқ вҖңAnd how much for yours, Diogenes?вҖқ вҖңCalco Platonis fastum!вҖқ вҖңAst fastu alio?вҖқ (<i>Vide</i> Diogenis Laertii <i>De Vita et Sententiis</i>, lib. vi. ed. 1595, p. 321.)</p>
					<p>For вҖңAttic Bee,вҖқ <i>vide</i> Cic. I. <i>De Div.</i>, xxxvi. В§ 78, вҖңAt Platoni cum in cunis parvulo dormienti apes in labellis consedissent, responsum est, singulari illum suavitate orationis fore.вҖқ] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1174" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For two translations of this Portuguese song, see <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1900, iii. 71.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1175" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I remember that the mayoress of a provincial town, somewhat surfeited with a similar display from foreign parts, did rather indecorously break through the applauses of an intelligent audienceвҒ вҖ”intelligent, I mean, as to musicвҒ вҖ”for the words, besides being in recondite languages (it was some years before the peace, ere all the world had travelled, and while I was a collegian), were sorely disguised by the performers:вҒ вҖ”this mayoress, I say, broke out with, вҖңRot your Italianos! for my part, I loves a simple ballat!вҖқ Rossini will go a good way to bring most people to the same opinion some day. Who would imagine that he was to be the successor of Mozart? However, I state this with diffidence, as a liege and loyal admirer of Italian music in general, and of much of RossiniвҖҷs; but we may say, as the connoisseur did of painting in <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i>, that вҖңthe picture would be better painted if the painter had taken more pains.вҖқ</p>
					<p>[A little while, and Rossini is being lauded at the expense of a degenerate modern rival. Compare BrowningвҖҷs <i>Bishop BlougramвҖҷs Apology</i>. вҖңWhere sits Rossini patient in his stall.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Poetical Works</i>, ed. 1868, v. 276.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1176" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>The Two Foscari</i>, act iii. sc. 1, line 172, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, v. 159, note 1.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1177" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Of Lady Beaumont, who was вҖңweak enoughвҖқ to admire Wordsworth, see <i>The Blues</i>, Ecl. II. line 47, <i>sq.</i>, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1901, iv. 582.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1178" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Christopher Anstey (1724вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1802) published his <i>New Bath Guide</i> in 1766.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1179" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Compare <i>English Bards, etc.</i>, lines 309вҒ вҖ“вҒ 318, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 321, note 1.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1180" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңGynocracy,вҖқ <i>vide ante</i>, <a>p. 473, note 1</a>.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1181" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Thrower down of buildingsвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1182" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Byron had, no doubt, inspected the plan of Colonel WildmanвҖҷs elaborate restoration of the Abbey, which was carried out at a cost of one hundred thousand pounds (see <a>stanza lix</a>. lines 1, 2). The kitchen and domestic offices, which extended at right angles to the west front of the Abbey (see вҖңNewstead from a Picture by Peter Tilleman, <i>circ.</i> 1720вҖқ <i>Letters</i>, 1898, i. (to face p.) 216), were pulled down and rebuilt, the massive Sussex Tower (so named in honour of H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex) was erected at the south-west corner of the Abbey, and the south front was, in part, rebuilt and redecorated. Byron had been ready to вҖңleave everythingвҖқ with regard to his beloved Newstead to WildmanвҖҷs вҖңown feelings, present or futureвҖқ (see his letter, November 18, 1818, <i>Letters</i>, 1900, iv. 270); but when the time came, the necessary and, on the whole, judicious alterations of his successor, must have cost the вҖңbanished LordвҖқ many a pang.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1183" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖңAusu Romano, sere VenetoвҖқ is the inscription (and well inscribed in this instance) on the sea walls between the Adriatic and Venice. The walls were a republican work of the Venetians; the inscription, I believe, Imperial; and inscribed by Napoleon the <i>First</i>. It is time to continue to him that titleвҒ вҖ”there will be a second by and by, вҖңSpes altera mundi,вҖқ <i>if he live</i>; let him not defeat it like his father. But in any case, he will be preferable to вҖң<i>ImbГ©ciles</i>.вҖқ There is a glorious field for him, if he know how to cultivate it.</p>
					<p>[Francis Charles Joseph Napoleon, Duke of Reichstadt, died at Vienna, July 22, 1832. But, none the less, ByronвҖҷs prophecy was fulfilled.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1184" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Burgage, or tenure in burgage, is where the king or some other person is lord of an ancient borough, in which the tenements are held by a yearly rent certain.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1185" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңI conjure you, by that which you profess,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">(HoweвҖҷer you come to know it) answer me:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Though you <i>untie</i> the winds, and let them fight</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Against the <i>churches</i>.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iv. sc. 1, lines 50вҒ вҖ“вҒ 53.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1186" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See the lines вҖңTo my Son,вҖқ <i>Poetical Works</i>, 1898, i. 260, note 1.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1187" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See SpenserвҖҷs <i>FaГ«ry Queen</i>, Book I. Canto IX. stanza 6, line 1.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1188" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To name what passes for a puzzle rather,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Although there must be such a thingвҒ вҖ”a father.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1189" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңRather than so, come, Fate, into the list,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And champion me to the utterance.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 1, lines 70, 71.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1190" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[For вҖңSeptemberers (<i>Septembriseurs</i>),вҖқ see CarlyleвҖҷs <i>French Revolution</i>, 1839, iii. 50.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1191" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңQuery, <i>Sydney Smith</i>, author of Peter PlymleyвҖҷs Letters?вҒ вҖ”PrinterвҖҷs Devil.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Ed. 1833. Byron must have met Sydney Smith (1771вҒ вҖ“вҒ 1845) at Holland House. The вҖңfat fen vicarageвҖқ (<i>vide infra</i>, <a>stanza lxxxii. line 8</a>) was Foston-le-Clay (Foston, All Saints), near Barton Hill, Yorkshire, which Lord Chancellor Erskine presented to Sydney Smith in 1806. The вҖңlivingвҖқ consisted of вҖңthree hundred acres of glebe-land of the stiffest clay,вҖқ and there was no parsonage house.вҒ вҖ”See <i>A Memoir of the Rev. Sydney Smith</i>, by Lady Holland, 1855, i. 100вҒ вҖ“вҒ 107.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1192" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңObserve, also, three grotesque figures in the blank arches of the gable which forms the eastern end of St.В HughвҖҷs Chapel,вҖқ and of these, вҖңone is popularly said to represent the вҖҳDevil looking over Lincoln.вҖҷвҖҠвҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Handbook to the Cathedrals of England</i>, by R.J. King, <i>Eastern Division</i>, p. 394, note x.</p>
					<p>The devil looked over Lincoln because the unexampled height of the central tower of the cathedral excited his envy and alarm; or, as Fuller (<i>Worthies: Lincolnshire</i>) has it, вҖңoverlooked this church, when first finished, with a torve and tetrick countenance, as maligning menвҖҷs costly devotions.вҖқ So, at least, the vanity of later ages interpreted the saying; but a time was when the devil вҖңlooked overвҖқ Lincoln to some purpose, for in A.D. 1185 an earthquake clave the Church of Remigius in twain, and in 1235 a great part of the central tower, which had been erected by Bishop Hugh de Wells, fell and injured the rest of the building.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1193" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>For laughter rarely shakes these aguish folks.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1194" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Took down the gay <i>bon-mot</i>вҒ вёә.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1195" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To hammer half a laughвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS. erased.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1196" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңThereвҖҷs a difference to be seen between a beggar and a Queen;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">And I вҖҳll tell you the reason why;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">A Queen does not swagger, nor get drunk like a beggar,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Nor be half so merry as I,вҖқ etc.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>вҖңThereвҖҷs a difference to be seen,вҖҷtwixt a Bishop and a Dean,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">And IвҖҷll tell you the reason why;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">A Dean can not dish up a dinner like a Bishop,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">And thatвҖҷs the reason why!вҖқ]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1197" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖңSine Cerere et Libero friget Venus.вҖқ Terentius, <i>Eun.</i>, act iv. sc. 5, line 6.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1198" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In French вҖң<i>mobilitГ©</i>.вҖқ I am not sure that mobility is English; but it is expressive of a quality which rather belongs to other climates, though it is sometimes seen to a great extent in our own. It may be defined as an excessive susceptibility of immediate impressionsвҒ вҖ”at the same time without <i>losing</i> the past: and is, though sometimes apparently useful to the possessor, a most painful and unhappy attribute.</p>
					<p>[вҖңThat he was fully aware not only of the abundance of this quality in his own nature, but of the danger in which it placed consistency and singleness of character, did not require the note on this passage to assure us. The consciousness, indeed, of his own natural tendency to yield thus to every chance impression, and change with every passing impulse, was not only for ever present in his mind, butвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ had the effect of keeping him in that general line of consistency, on certain great subjects, whichвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ he continued to preserve throughout life.вҖқвҒ вҖ”<i>Life</i>, p. 646. вҖңMobilityвҖқ is not the tendency to yield to <i>every</i> impression, to change with <i>every</i> impulse, but the capability of being moved by many and various impressions, of responding to an ever-renewed succession of impulses. Byron is defending the enthusiastic temperament from the charge of inconstancy and insincerity.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1199" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[The first edition of CockerвҖҷs <i>Arithmetic</i> was published in 1677. There are many allusions to Cocker in Arthur MurphyвҖҷs <i>Apprentice</i> (1756), whence, perhaps, the saying, вҖңaccording to Cocker.вҖқ] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1200" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>вҖң[Et Horatii] Curiosa felicitas.вҖқвҒ вҖ”Petronius Arbiter, <i>SalyricГҙn</i>, cap. cxviii. <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1201" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1202" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>[вҖңDamn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And without sneering, teach the rest to sneer.вҖқ</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Pope <i>on Addison, Prologue to the Satires</i>, lines 201, 202.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1202" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Bion, <i>Epitaphium Adonidis</i>, line 28.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1203" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[вҖқвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ genetrix hominum, divГҙmque voluptas, Alma Venus!вҖқ Lucret., <i>De Rerum Nat</i>., lib. i. lines 1, 2.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1204" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Job</i> iv. 13.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1205" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the account of the ghost of the uncle of Prince Charles of Saxony, raised by SchroepferвҒ вҖ”вҖңKarlвҒ вҖ”KarlвҒ вҖ”was willst du mit mir?вҖқ</p>
					<p>[For Johann Georg Schrepfer (1730(?)-1774), see J.S.B. SchlegelвҖҷs <i>Tagebuch, etc.</i>, 1806, and <i>SchwГӨrmer und Schwindler</i>, von Dr.В Eugen Sierke, 1874, pp. 298вҒ вҖ“вҒ 332.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1206" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[<i>Inferno</i>, Canto III. line 9.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1207" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1208" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>When once discovered it donвҖҷt like to come near it.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1208" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1209" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>A beardless chinвҒ вҖ”.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>вҖ”вҒ [MS.]</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1209" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[End of Canto 16. B. My. 6, 1823.вҒ вҖ”MS.] <a href="canto-16.xhtml#noteref-1210" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Canto 17-->
				<li id="note-1211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[May 8, 1823.вҒ вҖ”<i>MS</i>. More than one вҖңSeventeenth Canto,вҖқ or so-called continuation of <i>Don Juan</i>, has been published. Some of these вҖңSequelsвҖқ pretend to be genuine, while others are undisguisedly imitations or parodies. For an account of these spurious and altogether worthless continuations, see вҖңBibliography,вҖқ vol. vii. There was, however, a foundation for the myth. Before Byron left Italy he had begun (May 8, 1823) a seventeenth canto, and when he sailed for Greece he took the new stanzas with him. Trelawny found вҖңfifteen stanzas of the seventeenth canto of <i>Don Juan</i>вҖқ in ByronвҖҷs room at Missolonghi (<i>Recollections, etc.</i>, 1858, p. 237). The MS., together with other papers, was handed over to John Cam Hobhouse, and is now in the possession of his daughter, the Lady Dorchester. The copyright was purchased by the late John Murray. The fourteen (not fifteen) stanzas are now printed and published for the first time.] <a href="canto-17.xhtml#noteref-1211" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Italians, at least in some parts of Italy, call bastards and foundlings the <i>mulesвҒ вҖ”why</i>, I cannot see, unless they mean to infer that the offspring of matrimony are asses. <a href="canto-17.xhtml#noteref-1212" epub:type="backlink">вҶ©</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
